18
The Effects of Computer Science Stereotypes and Interest on
Middle School Boys’ Career Intentions
REMY DOU, KARINA BHUTTA, MONIQUE ROSS, LAIRD KRAMER, and
VISHODANA THAMOTHARAN, Florida International University
Like other STEM fields, computer science (CS) lacks representation of minorities, such as Black and Hispanic
individuals, both in the number of bachelor’s degrees obtained and the number of individuals in the CS work-
force. Out-of-school CS programs are often designed with the intent to inspire young people to pursue careers
in CS. Much of this programming focuses on developing student interest in CS and CS careers. Nevertheless,
it is not well understood how the stereotypes that children hold about computer scientists contribute to CS
interest and career choice. In this study, we set out to examine the complex relationships between CS interest,
held stereotypes, and CS career choice. We surveyed participants in an after-school CS program offered to
middle school boys who identified with racial and ethnic minority groups (N = 110). We tested three linear
regression models and confirmed that CS interest and socially divergent stereotypes—those that diverged
from societal norms—of computer scientists play unique and contrary roles in young boys’ career decision-
making process even when controlling for home and school factors. These models suggest educational CS
programs should include curriculum to dispel participants’ socially divergent stereotypes about computer
scientists rather than targeting CS interest alone, particularly if a goal is to inspire diverse young people to
pursue careers in CS.
CCS Concepts: • Social and professional topics → Informal education; K-12 education; Cultural charac-
teristics;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Computer science, interest, stereotypes, middle school
ACM Reference format:
Remy Dou, Karina Bhutta, Monique Ross, Laird Kramer, and Vishodana Thamotharan. 2020. The Effects of
Computer Science Stereotypes and Interest on Middle School Boys’ Career Intentions. Trans. Comput. Educ.
20, 3, Article 18 (June 2020), 15 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394964
1
INTRODUCTION
Despite the growth in computer science (CS) as a field, members of U.S. minority populations,
particularly those from Black and Latino communities, continue to go underrepresented both in
the number of bachelor’s degrees attained and in the workforce [1, 2]. Research in CS education
points to individuals’ interest in and identification with CS as a field as critical factors that
This work was supported by the Verizon Foundation. The authors declare no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise,
that may be perceived as influencing the authors’ objectivity.
Authors’ addresses: R. Dou (corresponding author), K. Bhutta, M. Ross, L. Kramer, and V. Thamotharan, Florida Interna-
tional University, 11200 SW 8th St, Miami, Florida, 33199; emails: {redou, kbhut001, moross, kramerl, vthamoth}@fiu.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
1946-6226/2020/06-ART18 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394964
ACM Transactions on Computing Education, Vol. 20, No. 3, Article 18. Publication date: June 2020.
18:2
R. Dou et al.
influence career choice [3–5]. This focus on interest as a predictor of career choice is often
associated with children’s identity development, with studies pointing to the emergence of
individuals’ ability to see themselves as a professional in a particular field as a more meaningful
framework through which to interpret career decision-making, especially among those pertaining
to these groups [6–9]. When youth identify with what they perceive are the practices of CS
and computer scientists, they express more interest in CS as a career option [4]. Nevertheless,
youth from minoritized groups often face obstacles that hinder them from seeing themselves as
computer scientists, creating a disconnect between their vocational expectations and the tasks
they perceive computer scientists perform [10].
Furthering the disconnect between children and CS careers, the lack of formal course offerings
within the K–12 curriculum limits student exposure to CS curriculum, which in turn limits their
association with CS. For schools with majority minority and low-income populations, the few CS
courses offered tend to be misaligned with accepted definitions like those set forth by organiza-
tions such as the Association of Computing Machinery (ACM) and the Computer Science Teachers
Association (CSTA). Instead of focusing on programming, coding, or hardware, students are more
likely to learn basic keyboarding and software skills and/or be taught by teachers who are not
required to have particular qualifications or certifications [11, 12]. For this reason, the growth of
informal CS education is invaluable for providing more accurate portrayals of the CS field (e.g.,
