ELT Worldwide Volume 6 Number 1 (2019) 
P-ISSN 2203-3037; E-ISSN 2503-2291 
 
EXPLORING BEGINNER EFL TEACHER  
IN MAKING LESSON PLAN FOR FIRST YEAR STUDENTS  
OF PUBLIC SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL IN MAKASSAR 
 
Yunitari Mustikawati 
yunitari@unm.ac.id 
Universitas Negeri Makassar, Indonesia 
ABSTRACT   
This study aims at exploring the Beginner EFL teacher in making learning 
objective, selecting learning materials, and assessment used in learning, and 
discovering the problems and solutions of the Beginner EFL teacher. This study 
is qualitative research with a case study. Data sources of the study were one 
Beginner EFL teacher of SMAN A (pseudonym), the Vice Principal of SMAN A, 
and the Head of MGMP Makassar. Data were collected by employing 
observation, interview, questionnaire, and documentation. The results of the study 
reveal that the Beginner EFL teacher has a problem in formulating clear learning 
objective and in using appropriate assessment to students’ achievement. However, 
he has adequate knowledge of selecting the materials from the easiest to the most 
challenging one. The solutions to overcome the problems of the Beginner EFL 
teacher are to provide supervisor (superintendent) with the same discipline in 
school, assign qualified experienced teacher as mentor teacher to guide the 
Beginner EFL teacher in his first year of teaching, and assign the Beginner EFL 
teacher to join MGMP and attend its monthly meetings as a compulsory activity. 
 
Keywords: Beginner EFL teacher, lesson plan, learning objective, learning 
material, assessment 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The failure and success in learning and teaching languages rely on several 
components. Strevens (1987:12-23) mentioned four basic components, namely the 
community, the profession, the teacher, and the learner. However, in my personal view, the 
teacher is the key component because the teacher has major influence in creating the 
learning to produce qualified learners. The former Minister of Culture and Primary and 
Secondary Education of the Republic of Indonesia, Baswedan (Kompas, December 2014) 
described that the condition of education in Indonesia is in the state of emergency. He 
referred to the data of Ministry of Culture and Education that in recent years, education in 
Indonesia shows poor results, one among others is the average value of teacher 
competence in Indonesia is 44.5; in fact, the teacher competency standard should be 75. 
This condition should then be taken seriously. Therefore, the quality improvement in 
education should start from a teacher.  
 
The government of Indonesia has introduced Law No.14/2005 to improving teacher 
development. Article 1 Clause 10 states that competence is a set of knowledge, skills, and  
behaviors a teacher or lecture must have, fully comprehend and master to perform his/her 
professional tasks. Teachers’ quality gives an impact on the quality of students’ learning. 
“Good quality of teachers can produce good quality of students, and then the poor quality
ELT Worldwide Vol. 6  No. 1 (2019) 
Mustikawati: Exploring Beginner EFL Teacher in Making …  10 
 
 
 of teachers can contribute to the poor achievement of students” (Jalal et.al, 2009:7). 
The process of learning will be effective if the teacher plans the lessons carefully. Hunter 
(1994) states that planning is as important in the classroom as it is in other areas of life. 
“Skill in planning is acknowledged to be one of the most influential factors in successful 
teaching” (Hunter , 1994:3). It means that teaching with a careful plan where objective 
becomes the criteria by which material is selected, content is outlined, instructional 
procedures are developed and assessment is prepared will lead to better learning for 
students.  
The importance of planning the lessons is mentioned by several researchers (Marzano, 
2010; Schoenfeldt et.al, 2009; Skowron, 2006; Richards, 2002; Nunan & Lamb, 1996; 
Nunan, 1991; Clark & Yinger, 1987; Taylor, 1970; Tyler, 1949). Planning the lessons is a 
rational process that tries to provide teaching for students’ learning. Thoughtful decisions 
are made when a teacher plans a lesson based on the knowledge and skills of the teacher 
(Schoenfeldt et.al, 2009:6).  
 
Numerous studies have investigated about non-Beginner teachers (McClutcheon and 
Milner 2002; Brown, 1990; Yinger, 1980; McCutcheon, 1980; Zahorik, 1975; Taylor, 
1970;). Very few studies have attempted to examine planning practices by Beginner 
teachers. The studies mainly examine both non-Beginner teachers and Beginner teachers 
(Richard, 1998; Brown, 1993; Livingstone and Borko, 1989). Studies on English lesson 
plan in senior high schools particularly in Indonesia context are very few (Prajas, 2009; 
Pujiono, 2013). The studies mainly used the ready-made lesson plan collected from the 
teachers to be examined without finding out the on-site lesson plan for further 
investigation. Prajas (2000), Pujiono (2013), and Mustikawati (2018) had similar findings 
based on ready-made lesson plan document which is the senior high school EFL teachers 
are in good categories in constructing English lesson plan. However, this research will 
investigate further about the on-site lesson plan made by the Beginner EFL teacher to 
discover how the Beginner teacher constructs his lesson plan before teaching. Thus, this 
research specifically asks the following questions: (1) How does the Beginner EFL teacher 
in public senior high school in Makassar plan his lesson in terms of articulating clear 
learning objective, organizing learning materials, and assessment used aligned with 
learning objective? (2) What are the problems and solutions of the Beginner EFL teacher? 
 
 
It is important to conduct this study because the study reveals the way Beginner EFL 
teachers planning EFL lessons, problems they encounter during the planning, and ways to 
solve the problems. By having rich data from the first hand source, the Beginner EFL 
teachers, the quality of teachers can optimistically be improved.  
 
LITERATURE OF REVIEW   
   Pedagogical knowledge of a teacher plays an essential role in language teaching. 
Based on the teacher’s understanding and the depth of comprehension on his pedagogical 
knowledge, he will decide how to create the desired lesson plan which leads to effective 
teaching. Teaching is effective when the objective of the lesson is achieved. 
 
Rovegno (2003:426-449) defines teachers’ knowledge as practical, personal, complex, 
and situated. As teachers develop their knowledge, it becomes more connected and 
detailed. Pedagogical content knowledge develops as a result of teachers’ connecting, 
organizing, and making sense of what they know. She also discusses knowledge of expert 
teachers that experts have more knowledge and know more details about the concept that 
11 
ELT Worldwide Vol. 6 No. 1 (2019) 
Mustikawati: Exploring Beginner EFL Teacher in Making … 
 
they understand. Experts are able to make more connections on broad issues. They also 
have situated knowledge because their decisions are based on clues that arise in the 
context. Experts know about their subject and they know how to teach it as well. Their 
knowledge is influenced by their prior knowledge, prior experiences, and school context. 
The ability to understand “the big picture… develops over time and is a sign of expertise” 
(Rovegno, 2003:307). 
 
Several scholars address practical knowledge, the knowledge teachers have of their 
own situations. This important concept concerns the knowledge teachers have of their 
classroom situations and the practical dilemmas they face in carrying out action in those 
settings (Carter,1990:299). Teachers make complicated interpretations and decisions under 
conditions of inherent uncertainty (Doyle, 1986). Thus, to plan, teachers engage in 
practical thinking that leads to an action appropriate to the particular situation. Carter 
(1990:300) believes practical knowledge is shaped by “teachers’ personal history, which 
includes intentions and purposes, as well as the cumulative effects on life experience”. 
Clandinin (1992:125) believes that teachers’ personal practical knowledge is constructed 
through “the person’s past experience, the person’s present mind body, and the person’s 
future plans and actions”. It takes into consideration of a person’s prior knowledge and it is 
highly situational. 
 
Ennis (1994:164-175) shares her notion about curriculum expertise which is 
based on three types of knowledge. Those are declarative, procedural, and conditional. 
Declarative is factual or subject matter knowledge. Procedural knowledge is the 
knowledge of how to do something. Conditional knowledge is the type of knowledge 
about when to do certain things and why. Thus, it is a more practical pedagogical type 
of knowledge. 
 
METHOD  
This research employed qualitative research with a case study approach because it 
examined a phenomenon focusing on a specific case; it examined in-depth of a 
phenomenon in its natural context; it helped to understand context characteristics of the 
issue and discovered what could be learned from the case, and it was based on etic and 
emic perspectives of the study (Merriam, 1988; Stake, 1994; Gall et.al, 2005). 
 
In selecting the samples, the study employed criterion-based selection (LeCompte & 
Preissle, 1993) to obtain rich information concerning planning EFL lessons. The 
characteristics of the participants were: the participants were the Beginner EFL teachers 
who teach in public senior high schools in Makassar, they have zero to a maximum of five 
years of teaching experiences in public senior high schools, and they have an 
undergraduate certificate (S1 Sarjana degree) especially in English Education. Gender, age, 
social status, and working status (permanent/non-permanent) were not considered for 
recruiting the participants in this study. Based on those criteria, the study obtained three 
Beginner EFL teachers. However, one participant could not participate due to her hectic 
schedule and one participant got accepted to work in a new place out of town; thus, one 
Beginner EFL teacher called by the name of Muhlis of SMAN X (pseudonym, due to the 
objection of the subject to reveal the real name) was the research subject.  
ELT Worldwide Vol. 6  No. 1 (2019) 
Mustikawati: Exploring Beginner EFL Teacher in Making …  12 
 
The data were collected through KTSP lesson plan documents, questionnaire, 
interview, and observation. The trustworthiness of the study was conducted into three 
parts, namely triangulation, thick description, and member checks. In triangulation, 
multiple data collection methods and data sources were utilized to check the findings 
of the case study as evidence of truthfulness (Merriam, 1998:207). Yin (2003) also 
suggested that in case studies the use of multiple sources of evidence allows for many 
lines of inquiry to converge together. So, other sources in this study were the vice 
principal of the school where Muhlis works, the Head of Secondary School Subject 
Teachers’ Working Group of Makassar, questionnaire, and interview. This study also 
provided a rich, thick description of the phenomenon that what Gall, Gall, and Borg 
(2005:306) illustrated the “situation and its context and gave readers a sense of the 
meanings in that situation”. The researcher then checked the participants’ perspectives 
by member checking, where participants reviewed the statements in the writer’s report 
for accuracy and completeness. It is an essential procedure to ensure deep 
understanding of teachers planning EFL lessons and the accuracy of the findings. 
Member checking may reveal factual errors that can be corrected. It is possible that 
EFL teachers may recall new facts about their situation when reading the report. 
Therefore, the report was re-written to obtain additional information as needed (Gall, 
Gall, and Borg, 2005; Merriam, 1998)..  
 
RESULT AND DISCUSSIONS 
A. The way the Beginner EFL teacher plans his lessons  
 
a. Learning Objective 
 
In terms of the learning objective formulated, Muhlis wrote in his lesson plan: to make 
students review the lesson taught previously, the use of to be, present tense, adjective, 
noun, article, apostrophe, and matching words (lesson plan document based on 
observation).  
 
Based on what Muhlis stated in his lesson plan, it is discovered that he did not use the 
behavioral verb or action verb in articulating clear objective, it is difficult to be measured, 
and unobservable. In fact, those three elements are needed to make clear lesson objective 
as Gronlund (2004:4) stated that “at the end of the lesson students be able to demonstrate 
that they have learned what was expected of them” and it should be measurable and 
observable of students’ performance. The students must perform to demonstrate that the 
objective has been mastered (Bloom et.al, 1956; Gronlund, 2004). 
 
Lack of understanding of knowledge in formulating specific learning objective of the 
lesson which is shown by Muhlis is also supported by his revelation in the questionnaire. 
He considered himself as “Less Competent” when assessing himself concerning 
formulating clear lesson objective. He admitted that he did not know how to make lesson 
plan by saying, “Oh, to tell the truth, no [in make lesson plan]” (interview), when he was 
asked whether he knows how to make it.  
 
Besides lack of knowledge, Muhlis also lacks skills which are related to practical 
knowledge shaped by his personal history. Before teaching at public senior high school, he 
had experiences in teaching English in Islamic boarding schools (pesantren). The
13 
ELT Worldwide Vol. 6 No. 1 (2019) 
Mustikawati: Exploring Beginner EFL Teacher in Making … 
 
 
 principals did not require him to make the lesson plan but suggested him to focus 
more on having the discussion in class.   
 
“I like teaching English in general. I like [to teach in] private school 
err boarding school. Your know the language is not important, I mean 
the way it’s not important. What is important is what we mean [by it]. 
And then he [the principal] said to me to just give the students topic 
every week, you just discuss it. That’s [what] I like” (interview). 
 
This finding indicated that did not get used to practicing making lesson plan since 
working in Islamic boarding schools. The habits of not making lesson plan were built 
without Muhlis realizing it; thus, lack of knowledge and lack of practice caused Muhlis 
unable to formulate clear lesson objectives.  
 
b. Learning Materials 
 
In terms of selecting learning materials, Muhlis wrote the arrangement of learning 
materials to be used in his lesson plan in an observation session as follows: 
Exercise 1 is to complete the sentences with the correct form of the Present Simple, 
Exercise 2 is to complete the sentences with the correct form of there (isn’t/aren’t),  
Exercise 3 is to complete the sentences using a possessive adjective or possessive pronoun,  
Exercise 4 is to complete the sentences with the articles of a, an, or the,    
Exercise 5 is to complete the sentences with the correct prepositions,  
Exercise 6 is to put in apostrophes where necessary,  
Exercise 7 is to complete the table of nouns and adjectives,  
Exercise 8 is to match the words of correct compound nouns. 
(On-site lesson plan document) 
 
He explained the arrangement of the learning material he made: 
 
“We must choose [from the book] the most important one and you 
organize [the materials]” (interview) 
 
Then continued: 
 
“I arrange the easiest exercise first, then getting difficult, getting difficult, 
and getting difficult to raise the challenge of the students. I mostly take the 
materials from the textbook [provided]” (interview) 
 
Based on the aforementioned data, it is discovered that Muhlis has sufficient 
knowledge and skills in organizing the learning materials. It is in line with Gagne and 
Briggs (1979) suggestions to make the hierarchies in organizing the order of learning 
materials. The hierarchies describe the sequences from easy to difficult or from simple to 
complex. The teacher will see the gradual achievement shown by the students from the 
easiest task to the most challenging one to achieve the objective of the lesson.
14 
ELT Worldwide Vol. 6 No. 1 (2019) 
Mustikawati: Exploring Beginner EFL Teacher in Making … 
 
 
c. Learning Assessment 
 
In terms of learning assessment, Muhlis wrote in his lesson plan in the assessment 
section: students are able to solve correctly the questions given about the lessons given 
(lesson plan document based on observation).  
 
Further in the interview he revealed: “I don’t understand why we have to plan the 
evaluation. But I evaluate by seeing the true of false of the correct answers.” 
 
When Muhlis was asked how he acknowledged that the students have learned what he 
intended them to learn, he responded: 
 
“..Uh, if, I found out that they are making many mistakes, so that means they 
don’t understand. Yeah, and I will explain again. But, if I found out that they 
uh they make correct answer, just a little bit false, a little bit incorrect, that’s 
an indication that they understand” 
 
Based on those aforementioned findings, it is discovered that Muhlis lacked 
comprehension in the evaluation system because he said he did not understand why the 
evaluation should be planned. He merely evaluated based on the numbers of correct 
answers to indicate that the students have mastered the lesson. The findings imply that 
Muhlis has limited knowledge and skills in language assessment. In fact, the assessment is 
a very important part of lesson planning to improve student learning. 
 
B. Problems and Solutions of the Beginner EFL teacher in planning EFL lessons 
 
In this section, the writer will inform the problems discovered in the research followed by 
the solutions concerning the Beginner EFL teacher in planning lesson. 
 
First problem: Muhlis lacks knowledge and skills especially in formulating clear 
lesson objective and assessing students’ achievement. He did not use a behavioral verb, 
cannot be measured, and unobservable; whereas, in the assessment he merely applied true 
or false answers as an indicator whether the students have understood the lesson or not. 
The solution for the problem is the Beginner EFL teacher needs to join MGMP (Secondary 
School Subject Teachers’ Working Group) and attend the meeting which is conducted 
monthly. The MGMP is a free of charge forum for subject teachers, in this case is English, 
where teachers can share their knowledge and skills for teacher development. It facilitates 
EFL teachers to improve teachers’ ability and skills to prepare, implement, and evaluate 
the learning process. So far, the MGMP has conducted trainings for four skills of language.  
 
Second problem: the school lacks attention concerning lesson plan submitted annually 
in terms of whether the lesson plan is made by the teacher or someone else and no 
feedback for revision as it revealed by the data sources below: 
 
Muhlis, “I didn’t make (it/lesson plan)”. Then he revealed that he did not make his 
lesson plan. Someone else, an English teacher, made the lesson plan for him to be 
submitted to the school. Muhlis gave the lesson plan to the Vice-Principal of Curriculum 
Affair. The Vice-Principal merely checked the lesson plan whether the teacher had signed 
it. Then, the signed lesson plan would be handed to the Principal to be signed (interview).  
 
15 
ELT Worldwide Vol. 6 No. 1 (2019) 
Mustikawati: Exploring Beginner EFL Teacher in Making … 
 
 
 
 
The vice principal: 
 
“So, they (teachers) make them (lesson plan) according to the curriculum, the 
prevailing (curriculum). However, if the curriculum is, say it is effective in the 
year 2000 and the 2000 (lesson plan) has been approved, in the year 2001 they 
will just copy it, in 2002 (they will) just copy (it), copy (it), copy (it), and so on” 
(interview).  
 
“No, nothing so called revision.” “Nothing, because the one who signed (was 
from) the curriculum. After (the lesson plan was) submitted to the principal, no 
more, it’s done, not checked” (interview). 
 
and the supervisor (superintendent) who conducted academic supervision has different 
discipline with the Beginner EFL teacher, so it is quite difficult for Beginner EFL teacher 
to develop rapidly. The solution to this problem is the school needs to have the same 
discipline for a supervisor if the school wanted to improve teacher development. The 
supervisor can give valuable feedback on the content of the lesson plan if he has the same 
background discipline as the teacher. Thus, the learning will be meaningful for Beginner 
EFL teacher and the teacher will gradually develop in terms of knowledge and skills. 
Another solution that can be applied is to provide mentor teacher for the Beginner EFL 
teacher to discuss the problems encountered in school which is still related to teaching and 
learning process including lesson plan. The mentor teacher is taken from the experienced 
teacher who has adequate knowledge and skills for mentoring the Beginner teacher. The 
objective of a mentor teacher is to guide the Beginner teacher in his first year of teaching 
in school. 
 
CONCLUSIONS, IMPLICATION, AND SUGGESTIONS 
The conclusions of the study based on the findings and discussions of the 
research are the Beginner EFL teacher has a problem in formulating clear learning 
objective. He is unable to use behavioral verbs, unmeasured, and unobservable. He 
has difficulty in using appropriate assessment to students’ achievement. He merely 
uses the correct answers obtained as the indicator that his students understand the 
lesson or not. However, he has adequate knowledge in organizing learning 
materials to arrange the materials from the easiest to the most challenging one. His 
prior experiences in Islamic boarding schools, in this case not making lesson plan 
before teaching which was encouraged by the principals, had at least given 
contribution on his less skillfulness in formulating appropariate lesson plan. In 
addition, the lesson plan submitted to the school did not get any feedback so the 
Beginner teacher did not know his development on making an appropriate lesson 
plan. 
 
 
Based on the results of the study, the researcher proposes suggestions that the 
Beginner EFL teacher needs to join MGMP and attend the monthly meetings. It is a 
positive thing if the school makes it as a compulsory for Beginner teacher to join 
the activity because the MGMP helps to improve teachers’ ability and skills to 
prepare, implement, and evaluate the learning process. It is a forum to share
16 
ELT Worldwide Vol. 6 No. 1 (2019) 
Mustikawati: Exploring Beginner EFL Teacher in Making … 
 
 
problems and solutions concerning teaching instruction and to gain current 
information as a reference for teacher development.  
 
The Beginner EFL teacher needs a kind of mentor, relying solely on school’s 
supervisor is quite difficult concerning different discipline, so it is suggested that 
the school can assign experienced teacher as a mentor teacher to assist Beginner 
teacher concerning the teaching construction matters. The last suggestion is 
providing the supervisor with the same discipline in school if possible so the 
content of the lesson plan can be checked whether the lesson prepared is already 
aligned with learning objective and the discussion made will be meaningful 
because the supervisor can discuss the content of the lesson plan as well as any 
problems encountered by the Beginner EFL teacher in the teaching and learning 
process. Thus, teacher development for Beginner teachers will improve in schools.  
 
