https://doi.org/10.1177/0255761419855827
International Journal of
Music Education
2019, Vol. 37(4) 547 –560
© The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0255761419855827
journals.sagepub.com/home/ijm
Integrating multicultural music 
education into the public  
elementary school curricula  
in Thailand
Nantida Chandransu
Mahidol University, Thailand
Abstract
This article reflects on various challenges encountered during a pilot action-based research 
“Integrating Multicultural Music Education into the Elementary School Curricula of Public Schools 
in Thailand.” This project was set up to develop lesson plans, activities, teaching tools and 
evaluation methods for music teachers. As a pilot-curriculum model, it pays particular attention 
to cross-cultural understanding for helping Thai children gain a sense of cultural conceptualization 
and the skills necessary for growing up in a racially, religiously, and culturally diverse society.
This research attempts to explore possibilities for various music cultures introduced to 
the formal education system in Thailand, which had previously restricted music education to 
nationalist-based Thai music and certain samples of Western classical music. Once children 
discover multiple music cultures, their perspectives are broadened. The outcomes of this research 
will also be beneficial for future instruction designs. The attempt to update music education 
in the Basic Education level to accommodate changing social and cultural contexts affected by 
globalization and urbanization will raise awareness of cultural diversity and the direction of music 
education curriculum development. Music education through the Thai formal education system is 
one method of preparing children to grow up in a culturally diverse world.
Keywords
multicultural music education, cultural diversity, cross-cultural understanding, elementary 
school, pedagogical approach
Introduction
The idea of cultural diversity has not been given much attention in Thailand’s past. Due to 
political and social policies since the change of the governing system in 1932, the then military 
Corresponding author:
Nantida Chandransu, Research Institute for Languages and Cultures of Asia, Mahidol University, 999 Budhamonthon Sai 
4, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom, 73170, Thailand. 
Email: nantida.cha@mahidol.ac.th
855827 IJM0010.1177/0255761419855827International Journal of Music EducationChandransu
research-article2019
Article
548 
International Journal of Music Education 37(4)
coup’s nationalism-driven concept of “the single Thai culture” was institutionalized as a tool to 
consolidate Thai citizenship (Connors, 2005 cited in Arphattananon, 2012). Before the emer-
gence of the nation state, there were as many as seventy ethnic groups found across Thailand 
(Premsrirat, 2006). It is also argued by many scholars that Thais have never been inculcated to 
realize that their country is multicultural (Aewsriwong, 2012 cited in Arphattananon, 2013; 
Hayami, 2006; Jory, 2000).
Nationalist ideology and the idea of a singularized Thai culture has shaped the people’s values, 
lifestyle, and behavior. The Thai authorities instilled these ideas through public education until it 
became deeply ingrained in the Thai consciousness (Arphattananon, 2013). At the turn of the 21st 
century, awareness of and movement towards cultural diversity was increasingly addressed in Thai 
politics and the academic arena due in part to the intervention of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization and its Universal Declaration of Cultural Diversity adopted in 
2001. In general, the declaration, which addresses the importance of appreciating cultural diversity, 
imposed obligations on the 188 country members, and consequently affected the operation of 
Thailand’s Ministry of Culture, formed in 2002. The country’s educational organizations have 
since placed great emphasis on cultural diversity. However, the initial stage of cultural diversity-
related campaigns was mainly about giving more space to local cultures from different regions and 
those of the ethnic inhabitants of Thailand in the government’s public cultural activities and 
education.
Quickly changing global contexts and the relocation of people are the two driving factors 
of change in lifestyle and interactions of groups around the world (Appadurai, 1993). Thai 
society has also seen an influx of culturally different groups such as laborers from neighbor-
ing countries and foreign investors. These people have brought with them various cultural 
traditions including lifestyle, language, food, dress, and beliefs, raising the awareness of 
cultural diversity in Thais. Evidently, the so-called cultural diversity not only means differ-
ences in ethnicity or tangible artifacts but encompasses idiosyncratic lifestyles and beliefs 
(Chandransu, 2017). As such, it is worth considering how children should learn to adapt to 
live in the midst of this diversity.
By the same token, the idea of educational reform, which emphasizes cultural diversity, has 
been put forward since the turn of the 21st century to reflect the government’s stance through 
determining learning standards for the Basic Education in a centralized manner. Arphattananon 
(2012), after surveying textbooks used in the Basic Education, found that cultural diversity 
was addressed in social studies and history subjects in prathom 1 through 6 or elementary 
level (Bureau of Academic Affairs and Educational Standards, 2010). Through the presenta-
tion of cultural diversity in Thailand, the textbooks’ behavior-based objectives expected that 
students understand various behaviors of the people in a society and the reasons behind these 
behaviors.
The significance of this research thus is directed at teaching a group of students with culturally 
diverse backgrounds through a multicultural music education approach. The researcher believes 
that multicultural skills can be honed through multiple means which are not necessarily confined 
to the teaching of tangible cultural artifacts but also include intangible ones such as values, per-
spectives, and practices. As a music educator, the researcher argues that the music subject can 
potentially bring out the student’s musicality and conceptions as well as enable them to appreciate 
the beliefs and values of other human beings. Learning to understand cultural difference in music 
makes us understand fellow human beings (Elliott, 1996). As such, multicultural music education 
is meaningful especially in the classroom, as well as in society.
Today, Thai children from elementary to secondary school levels are given a half an hour once 
a week for the music subject. There are two indicative standards for the subject known as A 2.1 and 
Chandransu 
549
A 2.2. The first standard includes the ability to: understand and express music creatively; analyze, 
critique and comment on musical values; convey musical thoughts with freedom; and appreciate 
and apply the concepts in this into daily life. The second standard includes the ability to understand 
the relationship between music and history and culture; and appreciate music as a cultural heritage, 
including local, national, and universal wisdom (Bureau of Academic Affairs and Educational 
Standards, 2010).
Upon reviewing various music textbooks that are used in elementary schools, the author found 
certain commonalities: elements of Thai and Western classical music; familiarity with musical 
instruments; and singing and playing instruments. In terms of cultural aspects, the textbooks mostly 
emphasize the characteristics of Thai regional folk music and that of selected Western music 
ensembles, as in, for example, marching bands, big bands, and orchestras. The presentation of 
content and related learning activities is based on a monocultural notion in which court music of 
Central Thailand is perceived as a high art form that possesses unique characteristics and reflects 
the national identity. Although the national curriculum encourages the inclusion of regional music, 
only mainstream regional music cultures are recognized: Northern salaw (a two-stringed fiddle); 
klong sabudchai (large single-headed drum); Northeastern maw lum; and Southern nora (a folk 
dance) and nung talung (shadow puppets). Ethnic music, popular music, local community music 
around the school and other music cultures that exist in Thailand are rarely mentioned in Thai 
music education. On the other hand, over the past two decades, other subjects, such as the social 
subject, in the socio-cultural strand have begun to shift the educational paradigm, towards more 
multicultural education approaches. This is perhaps due to the fact that the philosophy of music 
education has always been tied with Thai classical or court music as a symbolic representation of 
the country’s musical identity.
Such domination has long been transmitted down through the Thai education system. Also, 
institutes responsible for producing music educators are neither prepared for nor have developed a 
curriculum for multicultural music educators (Hirunrux & Chandransu, 2016).
Inspired by the global movement towards multicultural music education, the author devel-
oped a set of lesson plans for multicultural music education applicable to elementary schools 
in Thailand. The module is suitable for classrooms whose students are culturally diverse in 
terms of hometown, lifestyle, and learning capacity – a common situation in Thai schools. 
This study also attempts to introduce non-classical/court musical cultures into the formal edu-
cation. Students of Prathom 4 (grade 4) were chosen as test subjects for the curriculum. The 
aims of this curriculum are to develop musicianship, musical skills, and cultural knowledge. 
Students are expected to acquire basic cultural relativism by analyzing the idiosyncratic and 
social worldview of other cultures. It is hoped that by using music as a bridging conduit, chil-
dren will develop cross-cultural understanding and learn to appreciate cultural diversity in 
their society as they grow up. The goal of this research is to propose reform to the pedagogical 
approach used for multicultural education in Thai Basic Education so that the music subject is 
brought up to date with changing social and global trends. From a broader perspective, this 
research represents the first stage of multicultural music education reform in Thailand by pre-
senting new ideas that underline and address the importance of cultural diversity and innova-
tion from which all will benefit.
Background literature
It was found from numerous sources that music educators have to a certain extent been interested 
in the music of different cultures over the past ten decades (Campbell, 1997; Jordan,1992; 
550 
International Journal of Music Education 37(4)
McCarthy, 1997; Volk, 1993, 1994 all cited in Kang, 2016). The work of Sangmi Kang even articu-
lated that the perspective and practice of “multicultural music education” has been used inconsist-
ently according to the political and social norms of various eras. On the other hand, it is clear that 
other scholars have shown an interest in the music of other cultures, but from an ethnocentric 
standpoint (Ellis, 1885; Gilman, 1909; Hornbostel, 1928 all cited in Kang, 2016). These ideas 
inevitably affected the philosophy and pedagogy of music education which values the differences 
of music across cultures. As Cox and Steven stated regarding a principle of multicultural music 
education, “there are numerous types of music in this world, and each manifestation has an equally 
valid musical system and exists within their culturally constructed contexts, and that music educa-
tion must reflect the multicultural nature of music” (Cox & Steven, 2010). Their idea, however, 
may be applied differently depending on factors, restrictions, and political policy regarding educa-
tion in each country.
Partnership for 21st Century Skills proposed a scheme for preparing youth to become global 
citizens, who are identified as those who possess prompt cultural adaptability and can thrive any-
where (Panich, 2012). In Southeast Asia, one of the five objectives listed in the ASEAN [Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations] Course Guide Learning Resources for Elementary and Secondary 
Education for Promoting Being ASEAN Community Member with Prosperity, a guideline teaching 
resource for the region, is appreciation of cultural identity and diversity. Students are encouraged 
to explore, connect, and appreciate the cultures and beliefs of various countries and thereby under-
stand and admire community strength and identity (Bureau of Academic Affairs and Educational 
Standards, 2014).
Following the education trend, the author studied concepts related to multicultural music 
education and found numerous definitions and applications. Despite elements such as scope 
and method, still being the subject of debate and needing more research, multicultural music 
education can nonetheless be successfully incorporated into the music subject in Thai Basic 
Education. Five multicultural music education approaches, on which the projected curriculum 
was based, were chosen by the author. The first is the intercultural approach instruction invented 
by Cushner, McClelland, and Safford (2015). This model has four goals: to recognize social and 
cultural change; to understand culture, learning, and the culture-learning process; to improve 
intergroup and intragroup goals; and to transmit intercultural understanding and skills to stu-
dents. This approach holds that students cannot view other cultures analytically unless they 
know their own first. Thus, cultures closer to students should be studied before teachers offer 
an activity that connects established knowledge outwards to other cultures. For the scope of this 
research, the author will focus only on the first three goals and, due to limited time, will omit 
the fourth.
The second approach was taken from Banks’s contributions approach in which various ethnic 
and cultural groups are introduced to students (Banks, 2008). The most popular topics taught are 
festivals, celebrations and important days practiced or observed by each group. This approach is 
widely used in elementary schools. The third approach was Grant and Sleeter’s method which 
encourages students to appreciate cultural diversity by creating positive attitudes towards cultures 
including empathy, understanding, and tolerance (Grant & Sleeter, 2007). Through this model, new 
lessons are integrated into an existing curriculum’s structure, without imposing changes. Elliot’s 
modified multiculturalism was the fourth approach used in this study (Elliott, 1996). This model 
requires a curriculum that includes diverse musical instruments based on students’ ethnic, racial, or 
cultural backgrounds. The pedagogy considers similarities and/or differences in elements, uses, 
and functions of music from each culture. The last approach used in this study was Gibson’s three 
educational goals, which are to: understand cultural diversity; expand learning opportunities of 
Chandransu 
551
cultural diversity; and promote conservation of multiculturalism. This method aims to maintain 
each cultural identity found within the school’s locale. In addition to the five approaches, the syn-
thesized pedagogy for multicultural music education adopts the methods of Elliott and Reimer by 
first breaking down musical multiculturalism into three parts: music elements; instruments and 
ensembles; and cultural considerations (Elliott, 1996; Reimer, 2003). Each part is then addressed 
independently.
The author then organized a seminar to brainstorm with twenty-two individuals who were mul-
ticultural education scholars, child and youth scholars, educational policy-makers, music educa-
tors, school administrators, and student representatives to determine the instruction that enables 
students to acknowledge differences and diversity in a society. The results of the seminar suggest 
that the teaching method should not involve a comparison between musical cultures in a conde-
scending manner but rather should address the significance of cultural symbiosis through musical 
and cultural competency. Instruction should also aim to reduce cultural biases and establish inter-
cultural connection. An ideal starting point for this instruction is one’s own culture before branch-
ing out to that of other cultures using common elements/characteristics of interest to children of 
both cultures.
Choosing the topics to be taught in schools based on a literature review and the seminar, the 
researcher has summarized the multicultural music education approach to be tested in this 
study as follows: (a) knowing the roots of local music cultures and seeing the need for preser-
vation with pride; (b) reducing ethnic and cultural prejudice; (c) learning the roles and func-
tions of the music of each culture; (d) learning and understanding cultural diversity through 
their festive songs on various occasions and creating an appreciative attitude towards tradi-
tions and beliefs; and (e) instilling attachment and ownership, and creating a sense of preser-
vation and inheritance of local music cultures while embracing change, adaptation and 
acceptance of various music cultures.
Research design and participants
The sample group used in this research comprised prathom 4 students who were selected 
through purposive sampling. The group contained sixty-three students from 
Boonyasrisawad School and fifty students from Wad Makluea (Kanjanalugwidthaya) 
School. Both schools are in Klawng Yong sub-district of Puhtthanonthon District, in 
Nakhon Pathom province – an outskirt of Bangkok. The total number of the participants 
in the sample group was 113.
This study is research and development, using experimental methodology in which the 
author reviewed related literature that led to creating tools for this study. The pilot study was 
used to test the tools for content validity under the supervision of seven specialists from the 
fields of multicultural education, education, music education, and anthropology. The tools 
were approved with advice that it should be implemented within the time constraints. The 
author then tested the new curriculum using a post-test only before conducting a ten-hour 
lesson with the sample group. This study used only the post-test because the students had no 
background in music due to the fact that there was no music teacher in the school. Moreover, 
the content in the developed curriculum was not familiar to the students. The researcher 
developed multicultural music content from two indicative standards in order to test whether 
the students gained the knowledge following the purposes or research hypotheses after using 
the curriculum.
552 
International Journal of Music Education 37(4)
The data collection was separated into two sections: quantitative; and qualitative. The 
quantitative data included students’ performance that was assessed during and after the les-
son. The qualitative data included students’ cross-cultural understanding skills assessed from 
their workbooks and classroom observation as well as interviewing teachers and school 
directors. Regarding the analysis, the quantitative data, the learning outcomes, were assessed 
and then subjected to statistical analysis (percentage). The qualitative data were presented 
using descriptive analysis.
Research hypotheses
This research is based on two hypotheses constructed on the academic indicators of the pro-
posed curriculum: musicianship; and cross-cultural understanding. For the first aspect, stu-
dents are expected to have an average score above 70% of the total score in each lesson, and 
80% for the second. The author determined the passing score to be 70% because not all stu-
dents had equal prerequisite musical training and the assessment was skill-based. Based on 
Edwards’s four steps of learning (perception, awareness, cultural sensitivity, and sensitivity), 
the students’ cross-cultural understanding is expected to reach the awareness step (Edwards, 
1994). This step can be viably attained with cultural knowledge and does not require a great 
amount of time.
Community context, school context, and student backgrounds
The school selected for this study is located at Phutthamonthon, a recently established district 
in Nakhon Pathom province, Thailand. The district’s administration is divided into three sub-
districts and eighteen subordinate villages. Over the past ten years, the district has seen con-
siderable physical expansion and has become a location for academic institutes, government 
offices and important agricultural sites in central Thailand, and thus a target destination for 
people from around the country. Due to heavy migration, the district has also become highly 
multicultural. There is an assortment of residences for students in the district, 10% of whom 
are from rural families, 60% the children of immigrant laborers from the Northeast, 28% 
migrants from other parts of Thailand (note: their parents’ occupations could not be specified 
but they mostly earn a living as miscellaneous employees or vendors), and about 2% are 
children of workers from outside Thailand (Hirunrux & Chandransu, 2016). In the midst of 
this locality, the school provides a representative example of a typical Thai school whose 
surrounding community consists of culturally diverse people.
Integrating multicultural education into the subject of music in 
Thailand’s Basic Education
Education Core Curriculum: limitations and opportunities
Upon analyzing the core lesson units of the Basic Education Curriculum, it was found that mul-
ticultural music education can be integrated within its two academic indicators: musicianship; 
and cultural knowledge. Cross-cultural understanding remained unaffected. The model shown in 
Table 1 is designed based on the proposed ideas and the school’s locale.
Chandransu 
553
Table 1. Model of integrated multicultural music education.
Lesson unit
Learning objectives
Related
multicultural
education concepts
Musicianship
Cultural
knowledge and cross-cultural 
understanding
Unit 1
“Putthamonthol:
Our Home”
1 hour
(1) Listening and learning, local music cultures
Media
Audiovisual presentation of Phutthamonthol district 
and its local music cultures; audio samples of folk songs, 
lullabies, pleng lae and pleng tam kwan
(1) Familiarity with local music and 
famous musicians
(2) Know nearby music cultures and 
know oneself before knowing others
Knowing the roots
of local music
cultures and seeing
the need for
preservation with
pride
Unit 2
“Our Neighbors”
1 hour
(1) Singing, reading musical notation, and using body 
parts to make rhythm
(2) Music elements, that is, rhythmic levels and melodic 
phrases
Cognition that classmates may come 
from different parts of the country, or 
even from different country; but all are 
friends
Reducing ethnic and
cultural prejudice
Unit 3
“Happy Birthday”
1 hour
(1) Singing, reading, musical notation, and using body 
parts to make rhythm
(2) Understanding the meaning and function of birthday
Learning roles and functions of music, 
celebration of birthday in various 
cultures, building cultural receptiveness, 
understanding
Learning the roles
and functions of the
music of each
culture
 
songs in different countries
(3) Music elements, that is, rhythmic levels, song structure, 
melodic phrases, melodic pattern, diatonic scale, 
pentatonic scale, musical dynamics, ching rhythm, and 
composers.
Media
“Happy Birthday”
song, Thailand’s
“Happy Birthday”
song, Porn wan koed
(by King Bhumibol)
similarities, differences and diversity 
of culture, and exercising culture 
appropriately
 
(Continued)
554 
International Journal of Music Education 37(4)
Table 1. (Continued)
Lesson unit
Learning objectives
Related
multicultural
education concepts
Musicianship
Cultural
knowledge and cross-cultural 
understanding
Unit 4
“Festive Songs”
2 hours
(1) Listening to festive songs of different countries
(2) Singing, reading musical notation, using body parts to 
make rhythm, group music activities using idiophones
(3) Cognition of festive songs and of music elements 
found in festive songs
Cognition of roles and functions of 
music, humans’ celebrative use of 
music in various festivals, each of which 
contain different sets of beliefs and 
practices
Learning and
understanding
cultural diversity
through their festive
songs on various
occasions and
creating an
appreciative attitude
towards traditions
and beliefs
 
Media Examples
“We Wish You a Merry Christmas,” “Jingle Bells,” “Gong 
XI,” “Chinese New Year” song, Porn pee mai (by King 
Bhumibol), and idiophone instruments
 
Chandransu 
555
Table 1. (Continued)
Lesson unit
Learning objectives
Related
multicultural
education concepts
Musicianship
Cultural
knowledge and cross-cultural 
understanding
Unit 5
“Klong Yao: From
Phutthamonthol
music culture to
international music”
(1) Klong Yao 
processions in 
Phutthamonthol
(2) Klong Yao 
processions in various 
regions of Thailand
(3) Trae Wong 
procession and 
marching band
(4) Morphology of 
membranophones 4 
hours
(1) Listening and watching audiovisuals of different types 
of klong yao processions
(2) Reading and listening to rhythmic patterns of klong 
yao
(3) Performing klong yao, individually and in group
(4) Musical elements, that is, 4/4 meter, musical 
dynamics, rhythmic patterns, morphology of world’s 
membranophones, form of klong yao procession from 
past to present and its preservation
(1) Cognition of roles and functions of 
music
(2) Learning past, present, and different 
ensembles in various regions of Thailand, 
including marching band
(3) History of klong yao procession, 
cultural sustainability and change, 
adaptation of local music to fit social 
currency
(4) Organology/similarities and 
differences of international 
membranophones
Instilling attachment
and ownership, and
creating a sense of
preservation and
inheritance of local
music cultures while
embracing change,
adaptation and
acceptance of
various music
cultures
 
Media
 Audiovisuals: klong yao introduction, klong yao 
demonstration; procession repertory of various 
communities/Central, North, Northeast, South, 
marching band, and other procession music from 
various countries; Klong yao/pictures of different kinds of 
membranophones
 
556 
International Journal of Music Education 37(4)
Assessment and evaluation
In designing an assessment and evaluation scheme, the author used a rubric assessment so that the 
process is included as a part of learning (assessment as learning) where learning outcomes are 
evaluated by students and for students (Earl, 2003). The criteria were designed collaboratively by 
teacher and students, allowing the latter to plan their lesson and realize what it takes to achieve 
intended scores (Brookhart, 2013). Rubric evaluation is divided into two schemes: general; and 
task-specific. Today it is preferred to incorporate both schemes in designing evaluation (Hirunrux, 
2003). Similarly, this research used the combined method which is broken down into assessment 
and evaluation during the course for aggregated score and post-course assessment and evaluation. 
Music subject-wise, the scheme contains, for example, tests of musical performance, tests of listen-
ing and understanding of music and its elements, evaluation of singing combined with using body 
parts to complement sound, all assessed by teachers and classmates. For the culture portion, the 
scheme consists of, for example, multi-choice tests and diary logs of music culture activities. 
Teachers are responsible for explaining to students the evaluative criteria in the first class. More 
importantly, on-course evaluation is necessary so that students can improve, develop musical skills 
and exchange cultural diversity without them becoming bored.
Results, discussion, and conclusion
The mean average of learning outcomes of students in terms of musicianship (performing, singing, 
listening, and knowledge about musical elements) was calculated to be 83.06%, which was greater 
than the hypothesized score of 70%. In terms of cultural knowledge and cross-cultural understand-
ing, it was calculated to be 79.31%, which was less than the hypothesized score of 80%. Regarding 
the assessment of musicianship, evaluation of the five lesson units showed that students’ average 
performance exceeded the hypothesized score which was 70% . The researcher set the score as 
such because the students’ music background did not meet the standard criteria due to the lack of a 
dedicated music instructor. After the experiment, it was found that students had done unexpectedly 
well. Unit One, “Putthamonthol: My Home,” was designed to provide opportunities to listen to and 
learn local music cultures to build an interest in various musical traditions and culturally important 
people in the vicinity of the school. Since the lesson context in this unit could be found within the 
students’ own environment, interest could be stimulated easily.
As an introduction, this unit corresponded to the multicultural music education principle that it 
should facilitate learning, and students should learn what is close to them and reflect their true 
everyday lives (Campbell, 2004; Elliott, 1995). For Unit Two, “Our Neighbors,” the researcher 
selected musical compositions and contents related to elements of music that are developmentally 
appropriate to students. This enhanced activities, such as singing, physical movement, notation 
reading, and assimilation of music elements, as demonstrated by students’ responses. The same 
results were found in Unit Three, “Happy Birthday,” Unit Four, “Festive Songs,” and Unit Five 
“Klong Yao” where the respective evaluations showed significant improvement of the students’ 
musicianship. When the students could perform, sing, and listen comfortably, it was no longer dif-
ficult to stimulate interest in music-related lessons such as roles and functions, comparison, and 
organology. When music performance was assessed against analytic rubrics, students were able to 
set their goal for music practice because they were clearly informed as to what was expected of 
them and how they should perform to earn a decent score (Earl, 2003; Stiggins & Chappuis, 2008). 
Peer-evaluated activities played an important role in creating a relaxed learning atmosphere and 
training students to exchange and accept the opinions of others. Regarding cultural knowledge and 
music cultures, the class average performance in each lesson unit was below the hypothesized 
Chandransu 
557
score but not so much as to be statistically significant (79.31/80). However, the interviews with 
students further revealed that most of them could verbally articulate the cultural knowledge associ-
ated with music to their instructor. The evaluation from their workbook offered a weaker result 
because the students, being in prathom 4 were perhaps less eloquent in their written expression and 
effective descriptions were beyond their ability. Answering open-ended questions also seemed to 
be a difficult task for them and thus did not accurately reflect their learning outcomes. The research 
results show that students’ awareness of musical diversity whether in terms of instruments or reper-
tory have greatly improved throughout the course.
Moreover, observation of and conversation with students before and after the lessons revealed 
that they had developed an understanding of the notion of cultural diversity not demonstrated 
before the lessons. Recognition of the concept was evident following the introduction of and their 
exposure to various music traditions as part of their multicultural music education. However, 
reaching cultural sensitivity and appreciation of its diversity is a task that requires more time as 
well as systematic inculcation. The research results showed the viability of practical application of 
the multicultural music education pedagogical approach even without significant policy changes.
The pivotal factors for the realization of the model were raising cultural awareness and compe-
tency among children, which can be accomplished through a variety of ways, for examples, estab-
lishing research-driven teachers’ organizations and a seminar/workshop. In terms of the larger 
picture, it is still premature to determine exactly how far away Thailand’s education is from fully 
realizing multicultural music education. Nevertheless, this study will serve as an initial step 
towards reaping benefits from diversity of music cultures.
Suggestions for multicultural music education instruction: from 
ideas to practical implementation
Ideas and possible guidelines for instruction based on multicultural music education, obtained 
while reviewing concepts and theory for lesson design and learning activities include:
1. Knowing the “root” of music culture within one’s community and knowing self before get-
ting to know others.
2. Learning the dynamics of music culture within one’s community.
3. Learning functions of music in different cultures, creating cultural receptivity, understand-
ing similarity, differences and diversity of culture, and expressing culture appropriately.
4. Instruction that fosters an understanding attitude, accepts similarity and difference while 
not holding fast to a conceptual frame of a specific culture.
5. Instruction that reduces prejudice on cultural ethnicity (knowing others, knowing self, and 
equity).
6. Instruction that instills a fondness for and appreciation of music cultures, which will in turn 
result in preservation and inheritance of one’s music and in nullifying bias against music 
genres outside one’s habitual culture.
Suggestions for an academic follow-up plan through application of 
the concept of multiculturalism to music instruction or learning 
activities taking notice of the school’s neighboring communities
1. Lesson unit and activities design should consider cultural context of the communities in the 
school’s vicinity, music cultures and other related cultural information such as communal 
history, performing arts, traditions, and values.
558 
International Journal of Music Education 37(4)
2. Lesson unit and activities design should consider learners’ linguistic, ethnic, socio-cultural, 
and migration background; parents’ backgrounds, such as learning ability, and physical 
characteristics; and mundane cultural settings.
3. Lesson unit and activities design should study, abstract, and select appropriate pedagogic 
schemes and content whilst also considering the goal of musicianship and multicultural 
music education and integrate them within the academic indicators set by the Core 
Curriculum.
4. Determine cultural learning objectives starting by enabling students to know themselves, 
the roots of their own music cultures and of the communities within their school’s vicinity. 
Once accomplished, the content will expand to deal with understanding the culture of 
others.
5. Organize learning activities to raise students’ understanding of the cultures of others. This 
should be done through an analytic, comparative thinking process rather than traditional 
lectures or rote learning. It should be based on cultural facts. Students should be taught to 
look for similarities, as well as differences which will lead to an authentic understanding in 
terms of cognition of cultural knowledge and cross-cultural understanding.
6. Musicianship instruction should be developmentally appropriate and conform to the stand-
ard content set out in the Basic Education Core Curriculum B.E. 2551 [A.D. 2008)] (Bureau 
of Academic Affairs and Educational Standards, 2010).
7. Each lesson for elementary school students should be designed in such a way that it con-
tains a series of rotational activities, each lasting about 15 minutes. Such division promotes 
students’ learning efficiency and boosts stimulation without them becoming bored. Each of 
the activities can be undertaken again but with the caveat not to allow any particular lesson 
to become too long or repetitive.
8. Selection of media must be done based on cultural information close at hand, be it music 
culture familiar to students or local music culture. The information is to be modified to suit 
students developmentally as a point of departure towards association with other music cul-
tures. Either way, the media should preferably be in the form of pictures, sound clips, 
audiovisual, or online resources to facilitate teaching and learning.
9. Evaluation of students’ learning outcomes should be carried out quantitatively as well as 
qualitatively. The former places emphasis on evaluating musical skills, musical knowledge 
and culture knowledge using rubric criteria, which results positively as children can self-
assess. Such assessment would lead to participatory learning or active learning and be 
another way to develop active learners. The latter focuses on the skill of understanding 
cultural diversity by which children learn to express themselves and participate in class-
room activities through observation, conversation or interviews, or to write their thoughts 
into diary logs. It is important that evaluative schemes be designed based on students’ age, 
development and capabilities.
However, developing the skills to understand culture diversity is not a lesson process. It is rather 
a cumulative and continuous experience-based process. The aim of evaluating skills is to track 
students’ progress rather than to judge them.
Suggestions for instructing multicultural music education 
challenges remaining in Thailand
1. The Office of the Basic Education Commission should place emphasis on preparing bud-
ding citizens for mutual coexistence in a multicultural society by integrating concepts of 
multicultural education into subjects such as art and music, both formally and informally.
Chandransu 
559
2. The Ministry of Education should provide a complementary center in which cultural diver-
sity databases are stored, including music (Thailand’s ethnic music and world music). 
These databases could be used to develop or augment a cultural-diversity-based curricu-
lum. Some countries such as the US and the UK have been successful in implementing such 
a system and can serve as ideal models for Thailand to adopt and adapt to suit the country’s 
needs.
3. Academic institutes at the higher education level that are responsible for producing teach-
ers should consider the aforementioned issues in the course of preparing and producing 
future teachers that are suitable socially and globally informed. Also, institutes that offer 
the advanced diploma programs should either introduce multicultural music education to 
potential music teachers nationwide or incorporate concepts of multicultural music educa-
tion into their undergraduate courses majoring in music, in order to produce future music 
teachers who are cognizant and capable of teaching multicultural music as part of Thailand’s 
Basic Education Program.
Funding
The research received support from The Thailand Research Fund.
Research Ethics
The Committee for Research Ethics (Social Sciences), Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities, Mahidol 
University approved all interview guidelines, the assent form, participant information, and informed consent 
form for this project (MU-SSIRB NO.2015/375 B2).
ORCID iD
Nantida Chandransu 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4475-2701
