DOI: 10.4018/IJOPCD.2017010104
Copyright © 2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
International Journal of Online Pedagogy and Course Design
Volume 7 • Issue 1 • January-March 2017
Designing Counter-Narratives:
Constructing Culturally Responsive 
Curriculum Online
Xeturah M. Woodley, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, USA
Gaspard Mucundanyi, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, USA
Megan Lockard, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, USA
ABSTRACT
The growing field of online education has developed inside a cultural context rooted in racism, 
classism, sexism, and other forms of inherent bias. Likewise, the design and development of online 
curriculum is not excluded from the biases that have historically plagued face-to-face curriculum. 
In this article, the authors call online teachers into action by encouraging them to adopt an engaged 
instructional design praxis that builds learning environments inclusive of racial, ethnic, and gender 
diversity. Through the use of culturally responsive teaching, online teachers can create spaces of 
counter narrative that address curricular blindnesses and promote social justice.
KeywORDS:
Counter-Narratives, Culturally Responsive Teaching, Curricular Blindnesses, Online Education, Social Justice 
Praxis
INTRODUCTION
As social justice teachers, it is important for us to understand the political, social, and cultural contexts 
in which the burgeoning growth of online education is occurring. Racial, gender, and ethnic biases 
that teachers bring with them into the virtual classroom can directly impact the ways in which they 
engage students, especially students of color. Not only are teachers changed by the hidden ideologies 
they maintain but their students are also negatively affected. When teachers bring their inherent biases 
into their classrooms, those biases impact students’ self-efficacy and confidence. In her essay, Audre 
Lorde (1978) referred to the inherent biases of racism, sexism, classism, and homophobia as “human 
blindnesses” that are rooted in “the inability to recognize or tolerate the notion of difference as a 
beneficial and dynamic human force” (p. 31). Human blindness and the devaluing of human difference 
create what we term curricular blindnesses. Curricular blindnesses are policies and practices rooted in 
racism, sexism, classism, and homophobia—blindnesses that fail to recognize and value diversity in 
the curriculum. Unacknowledged racist beliefs and discriminatory practices of teachers allow for the 
vicious cycle of deficit thinking to continue in American education, which subsequently maintaining 
the curricular blindnesses both in traditional and online education (Solorzano & Yosso, 2001).
The purpose of this article is to provide critical reflections on racial and gendered curricular 
blindnesses within the curriculum, both classroom-based and online while providing culturally 
responsive alternatives through the use of critical teaching and design practices. As co-authors of 
this article, we generally talk about curricular blindness that occurs within online courses in higher 
43
International Journal of Online Pedagogy and Course Design
Volume 7 • Issue 1 • January-March 2017
44
education without focusing on a specific discipline because we are aware of the far-reaching impact 
of inherent racial and gendered bias across disciplines.
Critical reflections and culturally responsive design practices addressed in this article are grounded 
in education for social justice. Through the use of critical race theory (CRT) and Black womanist 
theory (BWT), we introduce key components necessary for developing critical online pedagogy as 
a means of addressing the human and curricular blindnesses inherent in higher education. In short, 
we agree with Christian and Zippay (2012) in that “teachers must develop a knowledge base that 
includes knowledge about culture—their own and that of others and attitudes and beliefs necessary 
to teach diverse students effectively” (p. 38). As the field of online education continues to expand 
and grow, especially with massively open online courses (MOOCs) that reach the world, it is of vital 
importance that teachers become leaders in developing curriculum and course offerings that act as 
counter-narratives to the dominant narratives of White supremacy and gender oppression.
Theoretical Frameworks: Critical Race and womanist Theories
To interrogate and critically analyze the curricular blindnesses in both traditional and online courses, 
CRT and BWT are used as theoretical groundings for the analysis. CRT has been used throughout 
the field of education to analyze curriculum. It has informed educational praxis, research design, and 
interdisciplinary ways of evaluating issues of race, class, and gender (Crenshaw, Gotanda, Peller, & 
Thomas, 1995). Seeking to introduce racial issues into the examination of law and society, scholars 
of color began using CRT as an alternate tool for discourse analysis as it offers scholars alternative 
viewpoints to dominant Anglocentric perspective (Lynn, 1999). In their examination of the field of 
education, Lynn and Adams (2002) found that CRT “allows scholars to acknowledge [the] racist 
epidemic in American culture…and allows for the recovery and use of the relevant histories of People 
of Color” (p. 88). In short, CRT can be used as the basis for examining the condition of people of 
color through a racial lens without negating other aspects of their identity such as gender and class 
(Crenshaw et al., 1995; Delgado Bernal, 2002; Ladson-Billings, 1995; Ladson-Billings & Tate, 1995; 
Lynn, 1999; Valdes, Culp, & Harris, 2002; Yosso, 2002). Through the CRT lens, we gain a pivotal 
awareness of the need for a more socially just curriculum—a curriculum that makes room for counter-
storytelling and that exposes racial curricular blindnesses (Carbado, 2002; DeCuir & Dixson, 2004; 
Delgado Bernal, 2002; Matsuda, Lawrence, Delgado, & Crenshaw, 1993). By using CRT in online 
teaching, instructors “make changes to their online teaching strategies in a way that challenges the 
status quo, and ultimately facilitate transformative learning for the students themselves” (Wang & 
Torrisi-Steele, 2015, p. 20).
BWT was developed as an alternative to inherent biases of sexism and racism within Afrocentrism 
and feminism, respectively. The emergence of the “womanist/Black feminist milieu began to take 
shape in the nexus of the civil rights and women’s rights movements of the 1950s and 1960s” even 
though the roots of resistance reach back to the work done by Black women to end slavery (Ross, 
2015, p. 361). The term womanist was first used by Alice Walker to characterize the Black woman-
centered philosophy and became popularized by Black feminist scholars like Katie Cannon, Margaret 
Shaw, and Layli Maparyan. BWT provides a framework for examining the intersections of race, class, 
and gender in the curriculum, scholarship, and research. “Race, gender and other identity categories 
are most often treated in mainstream liberal discourse as vestiges of bias or domination—that is, as 
intrinsically negative frameworks in which social power works to exclude or marginalize those who 
are different” (Crenshaw, 1991, p. 1242). BWT challenges these neo-liberal frameworks by providing a 
holistic worldview that places the experiences of Black women, and other women of color, at the center 
of understanding, thus removing them from their lived experiences at the margins (Woodley, 2013).
By centering the female experience in theory and research, BWT creates a context for 
understanding gendered, racial, and cultural experiences (Blackmon, 2008; Kolawole, 1997; Ross, 
2015). The womanist worldview and its associated social movement is “rooted in the lived experience 
of survival, community building, intimacy with the natural environment, health, healing, and personal 
 
12 more pages are available in the full version of this
document, which may be purchased using the "Add to Cart"
button on the product's webpage:
www.igi-global.com/article/designing-counter-
narratives/164973?camid=4v1
Related Content
Comparison of Student Achievement and Problem-Solving Techniques for
Integration Between Online and Face-to-Face Calculus Courses
Sarah Ferguson (2020). Handbook of Research on Online Pedagogical Models for
Mathematics Teacher Education (pp. 158-175).
www.igi-global.com/chapter/comparison-of-student-achievement-and-
problem-solving-techniques-for-integration-between-online-and-face-to-face-
calculus-courses/243505?camid=4v1a
Design Process of Three-Dimensional Multi-User Virtual Environments (3D
MUVEs) for Teaching Tree Species
Gamze Mercan, Dilek Doan, Pnar Köseolu and Hakan Tüzün (2020). Enriching
Teaching and Learning Environments With Contemporary Technologies (pp. 117-
137).
www.igi-global.com/chapter/design-process-of-three-dimensional-multi-user-
virtual-environments-3d-muves-for-teaching-tree-
species/248426?camid=4v1a
Student English Teachers' Vantage Points of the Digital Short Stories They
Designed for Young Learners
Gülten Koar (2023). International Journal of Online Pedagogy and Course Design
(pp. 1-13).
www.igi-global.com/article/student-english-teachers-vantage-points-of-the-
digital-short-stories-they-designed-for-young-learners/315299?camid=4v1a
Developing Musical Creativity Through Activity Theory in an Online Learning
Environment
Chih-Feng Chien, Brent G. Walters, Ching-Yieh Lee and Ching-Jung Liao (2018).
International Journal of Online Pedagogy and Course Design (pp. 57-74).
www.igi-global.com/article/developing-musical-creativity-through-activity-
theory-in-an-online-learning-environment/201116?camid=4v1a
