Integrating Ethics into Computer Science Education
Multi-, Inter-, and Transdisciplinary Approaches
Trystan S. Goetze
tgoetze@fas.harvard.edu
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
ABSTRACT
While calls to integrate ethics into computer science education go
back decades, recent high-profile ethical failures related to comput-
ing technology by large technology companies, governments, and
academic institutions have accelerated the adoption of computer
ethics education at all levels of instruction. Discussions of how
to integrate ethics into existing computer science programmes of-
ten focus on the structure of the intervention—embedded modules
or dedicated courses, humanists or computer scientists as ethics
instructors—or on the specific content to be included—lists of case
studies and essential topics to cover. While proponents of computer
ethics education often emphasize the importance of closely con-
necting ethical and technical content in these initiatives, most do
not reflect in depth on the variety of ways in which the disciplines
can be combined. In this paper, I deploy a framework from cross-
disciplinary studies that categorizes academic projects that work
across disciplines as multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, or trans-
disciplinary, depending on the degree of integration. When applied
to computer ethics education, this framework is orthogonal to the
structure and content of the initiative, as I illustrate using examples
of dedicated ethics courses and embedded modules. It therefore
highlights additional features of cross-disciplinary teaching that
need to be considered when planning a computer ethics programme.
I argue that computer ethics education should aim to be at least
interdisciplinary—multidisciplinary initiatives are less aligned with
the pedagogical aims of computer ethics—and that computer ethics
educators should experiment with fully transdisciplinary education
that could transform computer science as a whole for the better.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Social and professional topics → Computer science educa-
tion; Codes of ethics.
KEYWORDS
ethics education, embedded ethics, data justice, ethics course, higher
education, cross-disciplinary studies, interdisciplinary teaching and
learning, responsible computing, transdisciplinary studies, interdis-
ciplinary studies
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGCSE 2023, March 15–18, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9431-4/23/03...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569792
ACM Reference Format:
Trystan S. Goetze. 2023. Integrating Ethics into Computer Science Education:
Multi-, Inter-, and Transdisciplinary Approaches. In Proceedings of the 54th
ACM Technical Symposium on Computing Science Education V. 1 (SIGCSE
2023), March 15–18, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
7 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569792
1
INTRODUCTION
It is more apparent than ever that technical education is incomplete
without ethics education. Calls to integrate some kind of ethics
instruction into computer science education in particular have
been made for decades, but a spate of tech scandals in recent years—
whether by tech companies [22], governments [12], or academic
institutions [4]—has accelerated the adoption of computer ethics
into existing programmes of study.
Recognizing that there is a need for ethics in computer science
education is one thing; devising and implementing strategies for
integrating such instruction is another. But there is a consistent
thread throughout the history of computer ethics education: stu-
dents should encounter ethical and technical topics in tandem.
Writing in 1988, Miller contends that “the societal and technical
aspects of computing are interdependent. Technical issues are best
understood (and most effectively taught) in their social context,
and the societal aspects of computing are best understood in the
context of the underlying technical detail” [29, p. 38]. However,
the disciplinary structures of modern institutions of higher educa-
tion interfere with such integration. Expertise in ethics education
and expertise in technical education are usually developed by dis-
tinct progammes of study, in humanistic, social-scientific, and area
studies departments on the one hand, and in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) departments on the other. As
a result, computer ethics education is necessarily cross-disciplinary.
Much has been written on cross-disciplinary work in the acad-
emy [2, 15, 21, 26, 33]. In this paper, I provide a specific framework
from cross-disciplinary studies to help organize the development
of computer ethics curricula. The project of the paper is thus a
sort of conceptual engineering, that is to say, a philosophical in-
tervention that seeks to clarify and improve the concepts we use
to structure our thinking [7, 8, 20]. Terms like “multidisciplinary,”
“interdisciplinary,” “transdisciplinary,” and so on are often used in-
terchangeably, without reflecting on differences these concepts
might capture, and without explicit reflection on how the different
disciplines in question are to be integrated. By fixing the meaning
of these terms in place, we can see more clearly the particular ad-
vantages and challenges of multiple approaches to computer ethics
education, and even imagine new ways of doing so.
The paper proceeds as follows. First, I briefly outline some learn-
ing goals for any computer ethics education initiative. Second,
SIGCSE 2023, March 15–18, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada
Trystan S. Goetze
I briefly go over some typologies and frameworks for categoriz-
ing cross-disciplinary research and education, before introducing
my preferred framework. This conceptual scheme places cross-
disciplinary projects on a continuum from multidisciplinary to
interdisciplinary to transdisciplinary, corresponding to the degree
to which the disparate disciplines are integrated. I then illustrate the
first two categories with successful computer ethics interventions,
and I comment on the advantages and challenges of each. Finally, I
discuss what transdiciplinary computer ethics education may look
like, and how such an initiative may represent a transformation of
the field of computing itself. My contention throughout is that com-
puter ethics education should aim to be at least interdisciplinary,
but ideally should strive towards transdisciplinarity.
A few notes before beginning. First, this paper is not a thorough
literature review of relevant cross-disciplinary studies. I will only
highlight a few influential definitions before developing the frame-
work that I prefer. Second, I will not provide an argument that
ethics education should be included in computer science curricula.
I take this as sufficiently established by prior pedagogical work and
by the general state of the world. Third, I will not survey specific
topics that computer ethics education might cover. The particular
examples of computer ethics topics that I use are not intended to
be exhaustive or complete. (Instead, see [37].) The present work
is focused on the form rather than the content of computer ethics
education.
2
GOALS OF COMPUTER ETHICS EDUCATION
To orient us, let’s start by laying out some generic learning goals
for computer ethics education. These criteria will help us to judge
between different approaches to integrating ethics into computer
science education.
The following are drawn from the learning outcomes listed in
CS2013, the ACM and IEEE’s curriculum recommendations, un-
der the Social Issues and Professional Practice area of the body
of knowledge considered essential to all computer science pro-
grammes at the secondary level and higher [37]. For brevity, I have
synthesized the finer-grained items in CS2013 into more general
learning outcomes, and omitted those concerned with history, law,
and economics.
A graduate of a computer science programme should:
(1) Be familiar with their own ethical values, those of the com-
puting profession, those of their society, and the variety of
value systems that exist in the world.
(2) Be able to analyse and produce ethical arguments.
(3) Be able to describe the positive and negative ways in which a
variety of computing technologies impact the environment,
individual people, and groups of people, especially marginal-
ized social groups.
(4) Be able to identify the values and assumptions embedded in
a variety of technologies.
(5) Be familiar with the values, codes, and standards of profes-
sionalism expected of a computing practitioner.
As we will see, even in this simplified schema, several of these
learning goals—namely, (3), (4), and (5)—have implications for how
ethics and computing should be integrated.
3
CROSS-DISCIPLINARY TYPOLOGIES
Computer ethics education may be a cross-disciplinary project, but
what exactly does that entail? It seems straightforward enough that
philosophical ethics (and other normative disciplines) and computer
science are to be integrated in some way. However, there are many
potential ways this could be accomplished. The injection of ethics
might be minimal, such as a one-off lesson on the social impacts
of technology in an introductory course, and still would seem to
be cross-disciplinary in some sense. Or the integration of ethics
and computing could be so thoroughgoing that the programme of
study could be described as a social justice degree that makes heavy
use of computing skills. Or the curriculum could fall somewhere in
between. We need to clarify our conceptual framework to structure
our reflections on such developments.
Multiple definitions of cross-disciplinary education and research
exist in the literature. Unfortunately, many of them do not take
us further than the self-evident fact that these initiatives combine
elements of different disciplines of study. Klein remarks on the
plurality of meanings of interdisciplinarity, noting that the common
thread is that interdisciplinary work “is a means of solving problems
and answering questions that cannot be satisfactorily addressed
using single methods or approaches” [26, p. 196]. Similarly, Boix
Mansilla describes interdisciplinary understanding as a learning
outcome for students, where the goal is for students to combine
insights from multiple disciplines to produce novel insights, under-
standings, or knowledge [6]. These definitions are helpful in that
they point us towards the idea the cross-disciplinary learning and
research should go beyond the limitations of any one discipline on
its own. But which aspects of the disciplines should be combined
and to what degree are unclear.
An early typology, developed for an OECD report, identifies a
discipline as “a specific body of teachable knowledge with its own
background of education, training, procedures, methods and con-
tent areas” [2, p. 25]. Multi- and pluridisciplinary work juxtapose
multiple disciplines, where the former puts seemingly disconnected
disciplines together (such as history and mathematics) and the lat-
ter juxtaposes disciplines that appear to have some affinity (such as
French and Latin). Interdisciplinary work, by contrast, requires in-
teraction between the disciplines through their distinctive concepts,
methods, results, data, and so on. Finally, transdisciplinary work
provides a meta-framework of concepts for understanding differ-
ent disciplines from the perspective of philosophy or sociology of
knowledge. This typology already recognizes that cross-disciplinary
work can be shallow or deep, but does not provide much clarity
on what the shallower forms may look like, or whether there are
different grades of interdisciplinary integration.
Boden provides a six-tiered framework [5]. The lower tiers put
multiple disciplines under one organizational umbrella and make
varying formal and informal efforts to encourage communication
between researchers and teachers from different backgrounds. The
highest tier, what Boden calls integrated interdisciplinarity, requires
concepts, theories, and results from one discipline to actively con-
tribute to the other and, ideally, vice versa. She goes so far as to
characterize this tier as “the only true interdisciplinarity,” labelling
the lower tiers “intellectually tolerant forms of multidisciplinarity”
[5, p. 20]. While useful, for my purposes Boden’s typology is too-fine
Integrating Ethics into Computer Science Education: Multi-, Inter-, and Transdisciplinary Approaches
SIGCSE 2023, March 15–18, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada
grained on one end of the spectrum of cross-disciplinary work, and
stops short of an even higher tier of disciplinary integration—what
I will call transdisciplinarity—which I think is especially important
to consider in computer ethics education.
More recently, Klein has developed a more complex typology of
cross-disciplinary projects [27]. Her account largely follows that of
the OECD report [2], while synthesizing it with more recent work,
including some of the above. She also discusses several trends in
how academics understand the notion of transdisciplinarity; these
vary from frameworks that systematically integrate knowledge
into an organized whole, to synthesizing paradigms that cut across
multiple discipines through common elements or themes, to critical
projects that aim to dismantle the very idea of disciplines of study, to
approaches that shift the focus from disciplines of study to difficult
societal problems that require diverse methods and perspectives
to solve. Klein declines to take a stand on which understanding
of “transdisciplinary” is preferred, so while her typology provides
greater precision, it does not take us much further than the other
works summarized above.
Writing about AI ethics education, Raji et al. argue that we should
resist several common trends in teaching social and ethical issues
in computing, namely, an implicit hierarchy placing technical skills
as more important than ethical skills, and the false impression
that good technologists are “unicorns” who can do all the techni-
cal and ethical work by themselves [32]. Instead, Raji et al. argue
that computing educators must collaborate across disciplines and
communities to deliver socially responsible education, calling this
approach transversal. But Raji et al. do not provide a clear definition
of “transversal.” A transversal problem, on their view, “involv[es]
methods, theories and collaborators across several traditional dis-
ciplines” and yet “is distinct from an interdisciplinary problem as
its solution is not found in-between given disciplines” but should
emerge from stakeholder-centred critiques of the impacts of tech-
nologies [32, p. 523]. The problems they mention are important, as
is the inclusion of lay publics through a stakeholder lens. But I find
that the notion of “transversality” remains obscure.
The framework I propose for understanding computer ethics
education comes from Rosenfield [25, 34]. She uses the terms mul-
tidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and transdisciplinary to describe
three degrees to which cross-disciplinary work integrates the con-
cepts, methods, and knowledge of distinct disciplines. In that order,
these categories compose a scale from the least to the most inte-
gration. I prefer this framework because it combines (or is at least
compatible with) the insights of the approaches cited above, while
also going beyond them to include a specific definition of transdis-
ciplinarity that marks a higher level of disciplinary integration. In
context, Rosenfield uses this framework to understand differences
between several cross-disciplinary health science projects.
It is not entirely clear how Rosenfield arrived at this particular
typology (she does not cite any earlier work in cross-disciplinary
studies). But it is probable that she was at least indirectly influenced
by the OECD report [2], given its prominence as a starting point
for the usage of these terms [27]. In the following section, I provide
more detail on this particular way of carving up these concepts.
4
A CROSS-DISCIPLINARY FRAMEWORK
A multidisciplinary collaboration involves researchers who “work
in parallel or sequentially from disciplin[e]-specific base[s] to ad-
dress [a] common problem” [34, p. 1351]. In these collaborations,
researchers from different disciplines recognize that they have a
common interest in some subject of research, and would mutu-
ally benefit from multiple inquiries from different disciplinary ap-
proaches. However, each researcher or team engages independently
in the inquiry, from within their own disciplinary context, using
their discipline’s methods, background knowledge, and conceptual
frameworks, reporting their findings to their collaborators in other
disciplines only after their own work is complete. The inquiries hap-
pen either in parallel, or sequentially with one discipline’s experts
handing off their results to the next.
An interdisciplinary research project involves researchers who
“work jointly but still from disciplin[e]-specific bas[es] to address [a]
common problem” [34, p. 1351]. In contrast with multidisciplinary
research, interdisciplinary collaborations require all disciplinary
experts to work on the same project, instead of pursuing discrete
inquiries. In doing so, however, each disciplinary expert or team still
employs their own discipline’s methods and conceptual frameworks.
As in multidisciplinary research, experts from different disciplines
might work sequentially, one discipline’s findings being reported to
the next. But instead of being essentially separate inquiries on the
same subject that are brought together only at critical milestones,
in an interdisciplinary collaboration, every stage of work informs
the next, regardless of its disciplinary home.
A transdisciplinary research project involves researchers who
“work jointly using [a] shared conceptual framework drawing to-
gether disciplin[e]-specific theories, concepts and approaches to
address [a] common problem” [34, p. 1351]. In a transdisciplinary
project, the collaboration extends beyond contributing to the same
project using discrete disciplinary methods: the nature of the project
requires integrating at the level of the conceptual frameworks and
methods used in order to address a complex subject. In the process,
a distinctive approach may emerge that could become a new disci-
pline itself, such as the rapprochement of philosophy, psychology,
neuroscience, computer science, linguistics, and other fields that
produced the discipline of cognitive science [36].
To illustrate, suppose a group of philosophers and data scientists
are interested in issues of data bias. In a multidisciplinary collab-
oration, the data scientists would work on technical issues and
the philosophers on ethical issues largely independently, though
their results may productively inform one another’s work. In an
interdisciplinary collaboration, the philosophers and data scientists
would work on the same project, contributing insights and frame-
works from both disciplines to inform the direction of research. In a
transdisciplinary collaboration, those frameworks would instead be
combined, perhaps producing a different paradigm for doing data
science that makes ethics and justice equally important to success
criteria as technical criteria such as statistical significance.
In the following sections, I apply this framework to computer
ethics education.
SIGCSE 2023, March 15–18, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada
Trystan S. Goetze
5
MULTIDISCIPLINARY COMPUTER ETHICS
A multidisciplinary computer ethics initiative integrates ethical
education in parallel or in sequence with technical instruction, but
keeps these disciplines separate within the degree programme as
a whole. Ethical concepts and skills are taught separately from
technical concepts and skills, and they are brought together only at
key milestones in the course of study. Ethics is treated as something
that can inform and improve technical computing work, but not as
essential to the work of computing per se.
One form of multidisciplinary ethics intervention is to include
some aspect of ethical thinking into existing assignments in a tech-
nical course, without providing specific instruction on ethical issues
from a humanistic discipline. For example, a project-based course
might require students to write a section reflecting on ethical impli-
cations of their work in a report accompanying their final project,
perhaps on the model of ethics statements that are now required of
many computer science conference submissions. To provide some
structure, this assignment might take after a disclosure tool, such
as model cards [30] or dataset nutrition labels [14].
Another multidisciplinary approach is a dedicated computer
ethics course. Ethics instruction takes place in parallel and in se-
quence with technical computer science instruction. Students are
left to integrate ethics into their professional practice once they tran-
sition to the workforce or further education. During their course of
study, they might not encounter ethical instruction or assessment
again, unless they take other ethics or professionalism courses. I
have taught such a course: Social, Ethical, and Professional Issues in
Computer Science, a required course for computer science majors
at Dalhousie University [17]. The topics we discussed included the
ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, philosophical ethics,
privacy, intellectual property, digital divides, computing and the
economy, bias in computer systems, and AI ethics.
A multidisciplinary ethics intervention has some advantages,
chiefly in that it requires only minimal modification to existing
technical curricula. A dedicated ethics course could take the place
of a breadth requirement elective, while still serving some of the
same pedagogical purposes. Such a course can be taught by a single
academic hire, possibly even part-time for smaller computer science
programmes. Adding ethical reflection to assignments in technical
courses is an even lighter lift.
There are, however, significant disadvantages to a multidisci-
plinary ethics intervention. These approaches fail to take on Miller’s
insight that technical and ethical issues are best taught in con-
nection with one another, rather than separately. This artificially
isolates subjects that, in the professional world, always co-occur:
computing always takes place in a social context, and ethical issues
arise in connection with specific aspects of technical computing
work. As a result, it is more difficult to achieve learning goals (3)
and (4). It is possible to teach students how to describe the ethical
effects of computing technologies and the values embedded in tech-
nologies as abstract skills, but this will be more impactful if these
skills are shown to be directly relevant to the students’ own work.
Furthermore, multidisciplinary computer ethics education risks
presenting ethics as supplemental to the “real” work of computer
science, namely, the technical skills [19, 32]. With the bulk of the
curriculum dedicated to technical instruction independent of ethics
instruction, and ethics interventions limited to one-off courses or
assessments, students are given the impression that ethics is an
afterthought, burden, or box to tick. This impression is antithetical
to the cultivation of professional responsibility among computing
practitioners captured by learning goal (5).
For these reasons, multidisciplinary computer ethics instruction
is less than ideal—although I speak from experience when I claim
that it can still be impactful, and is worth doing if no alternative is
possible. For the pedagogical goals of a computer ethics to be fully
met, though, the disciplines need to be more tightly integrated.
6
INTERDISCIPLINARY COMPUTER ETHICS
A closer integration of ethics and computing education would pro-
duce an interdisciplinary programme, where both disciplines are
taught concurrently in service of the same shared goals. Each dis-
cipline remains distinct in the concepts, background, and skills
that they bring to bear, but both sets are used by instructors and
students to engage with the same material. In interdisciplinary
computer ethics education, ethics is a skillset that is presented as a
requirement for doing quality work in the computing professions,
despite being different in kind from technical skills.
Interdisciplinary computer ethics is perhaps easier to achieve
in the context of ethics modules which are taught in the midst
of ongoing technical courses. Indeed, it is explicitly our goal in
the Embedded EthiCS™ programme at Harvard University, and
in other initiatives that have used Embedded EthiCS as a model.
As Grosz et al. explain, “For students to succeed at learning not
only how to build innovative computing systems, but also how to
determine whether they should build those systems or how ethical
considerations should constrain their design, it is imperative that
[philosophy and computing] work together” [19, p. 57]. Much of the
work in the Teaching Lab, which develops and workshops ethics
modules every semester, is to ensure that the ethical content of the
lesson and the technical content of the course are closely connected,
such that students can understand the relevance of the philosophical
concepts, theories, and arguments they study in the module to their
broader work in the course and in their professional careers.
For example, in a recent Embedded EthiCS module in an upper-
division undergraduate course on economics and computation, the
teaching fellow designed a lesson demonstrating how social and eth-
ical issues are connected with mechanism design in a particularly
vivid way [28]. The course’s technical content is concerned, among
other things, with formalizations of decision-making processes in
the economy, such as game theory, and how those mathematical
approaches can be operationalized in computational systems. The
module concentrated on how mechanisms can be “strategy-proofed,”
such that it is no longer possible to deploy certain rational choice
strategies that give some agents an advantage over others. The
ethical implications of strategy-proof mechanisms were illustrated
through an interactive exercise modelled on a real-world case from
the Boston schools system [1]. Students took on the role of par-
ents indicating their preferred choices of schools for their children.
Students could instantly see the differences in results between the
original and strategy-proofed systems, and reflected on how the
two systems might impact different demographic groups.
Integrating Ethics into Computer Science Education: Multi-, Inter-, and Transdisciplinary Approaches
SIGCSE 2023, March 15–18, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada
In this example, the ethical and technical content of the module
are distinct, but mutually reinforcing in a way not quite attainable
with a multidisciplinary approach. The technical content—game the-
ory, rational choice strategies, mechanism design—flows directly
from the main content of the course. The ethical issue arises in
connection with the presence or absence of a specific technical
feature—strategy-proofing—but is explained using philosophical
concepts—fairness, equality of opportunity, social justice. The po-
tential solutions to the ethical issue are rooted in both the technical
and ethical aspects of the case, and the case invites further reflec-
tion on the social conditions which produce the inequalities at
issue—why, for instance, are there are better and worse schools to
choose from, anyway? Because the two disciplines are more closely
integrated, the relevance of social and ethical considerations to
technical decisions is more clear, and the interplay between ethical
reasoning and technical design processes becomes obvious.
The disadvantages of an interdisciplinary approach to computer
ethics are mainly institutional and structural. Few scholars are
specialists in both computing and philosophy (or some other nor-
mative discipline), so the process of developing interdisciplinary
modules or courses usually must be collaborative. This can require
additional time on the part of faculty and graduate students, and
may require additional investment on the part of institutions. Some
institutions may lack the resources or academic infrastructure; for
example, some smaller colleges may not have philosophical ex-
pertise available. Such institutions should receive support from
more well-resourced institutions, perhaps in the form of upskilling
sessions for computer science instructors interested in teaching
ethics modules. In either case, this presents another challenge for
interdisciplinary work: making all parties familiar with the jargon
and background knowledge of the different disciplines.
The main advantages of an interdisciplinary computer ethics
approach are pedagogical. As we saw, in a multidisciplinary initia-
tive, the separation of the disciplines is in tension with learning
goals (3), (4), and (5). To meet these goals, an interdisciplinary ini-
tiative enables students to engage in ethical evaluation of the same
technologies that they are studying in their technical courses. The
assumptions of the developers of these technologies and the values
embedded in those technologies become more salient when the
technical features of those technologies are already top-of-mind.
And, the inculcation of professional responsibility is facilitated by
engaging with these questions in a similar context to that in which
ethical issues might arise in professional practice, namely, while in
the midst of learning about and deploying a technical system.
Teaching communities that are serious about including ethics
in a computing curriculum should therefore strive to achieve at
least an interdisciplinary approach, despite its potential challenges.
The learning goals cannot be met as effectively by a multidisci-
plinary intervention—though multidisciplinary computer ethics is
a reasonable fallback where resources are unavailable.
7
TRANSDISCIPLINARY COMPUTER ETHICS
The prefix “trans-” in transdisciplinary suggests that such a project
transcends the conventional divide between the disciplines involved,
going over and beyond their limitations and perhaps creating a new
field of study better equipped to tackle some range of problems. For
example, one way to interpret the emergence of cognitive science
and of science and technology studies as distinctive fields is that
the various disciplines studying the mind and the social aspects of
technoscience respectively came together to create new concepts,
methods, and theories that could not be produced within their
progenitor disciplines [24, 36]. Similarly, we might wonder what
may emerge if ethics and computing were to become so closely
integrated as to produce a new discipline of research and education.
Transdisciplinary work requires that practitioners in multiple
disciplines use their distinct expertises to craft a new conceptual
and methodological framework to tackle a shared inquiry. Fully
detailing such a framework for computer ethics is beyond the scope
of the present paper, but we can get a sense of what transdisciplinary
computer ethics might look like by examining the emerging data
justice movement. As D’Ignazio and Klein describe it, one facet
of data justice is to move away from post hoc ethical fixes—such
as correcting data bias only after downstream problems emerge—
and instead to consider social justice at every step of the design,
development, and deployment of a system [11].
This approach to computer ethics is one facet of a more radical
conceptual shift that D’Ignazio and Klein recommend, away from
conceiving of ethical failures in technology as merely isolated inci-
dents caused by immoral individuals or broken technologies, and
towards a more systemic understanding of the causes of harm and
injustice associated with various sociotechnical systems. We might
capture this insight as aligning technical and ethical criteria for a
successful project: the system as a whole must function well in the
actual context of use, both in terms of operating without technical
fault and in terms of avoiding harm and promoting good.
This last point is one I want to emphasize: a transdisciplinary
approach to computer ethics would make ethical success at least as
important as technical success in computing generally. On this ap-
proach, ethical reflection is no longer a supplemental consideration,
as multidisciplinary interventions position it, nor is it an allied but
still alien skillset, as it is positioned by interdisciplinary initiatives.
Rather, on a transdisciplinary vision, ethical reflection is a core skill
for computing, as important as other specialized areas of comput-
ing practice. A technological innovation would not be considered
technically sound unless it is also ethically responsible to deploy.
The conceptual frameworks are not just running in parallel; they
have merged.
How could transdisciplinary computer ethics be achieved in a
computer science education context? Here is a speculative outline
of some elements of a transdisciplinary Introduction to Computer
Science course. Social and ethical issues would be raised in conjunc-
tion with technical topics at each step of the way. Introduction of
the basic functions of a computer and computing hardware are pre-
sented in conjunction with a discussion of sustainability of natural
resources and labour justice in manufacturing [10]. Discussion of
different programming languages raises issues about the usability
of different languages, with a focus on accessibility [38]. Discussion
of efficiency as a technical criterion for success in programming
includes ethical concerns about the usage of limited computing
resources and the massive energy requirements of some computing
applications, such as large language model training [35]. Assign-
ments to edit and correct code require not just consideration of
SIGCSE 2023, March 15–18, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada
Trystan S. Goetze
syntax errors and failures to fulfill the requirements of a project
brief, but also the social impacts of poor design choices [39].
More advanced computing courses might push the integration
of ethics and computing further. A transdisciplinary data science
course, for example, might start from the premise that data science
can and should be used to further the good of all, and implement
a project-based pedagogy where students do just that. Everything
they learn in such a course—technical data science skills, yes, but
also theories of social justice, debiasing methods, and/or community
engagement practices—might lead to a final project intended to
address some inequity in their local community, perhaps using
public datasets to create visualizations of important and under-
discussed trends, such as differential health outcomes based on
local factors.
Even highly technical computing courses can incorporate ethical
concerns. A course on compilers, for instance, might again con-
sider the energy requirements of different computing languages
[31]. Or, because compilation touches source code and machine
code, and involves distinct pieces of software that may be released
under different licences, various stages of a compilers course may
raise discussion of the ethics of intellectual property and free and
open-source software [16]. It may be more difficult to incorporate
discussion of ethical issues throughout theory-heavy courses in
computing, but interdisciplinary modules can still provide a link
back to the transdisciplinary programme’s overall merging of the
ethical and the technical. For example, a module in a theory-heavy
course might consider whether theorists bear any responsibility
for the downstream applications of their ideas [18].
With sufficient commitment from faculty in computing, ethics,
and other disciplines, a transdisciplinary computing endeavour
might scale up into a distinctive minor or major concentration
in an emergent field, say, data justice or responsible computing.
However, this raises the main disadvantage of a transdisciplinary
approach to teaching and research: even more than interdisciplinary
projects, transdisciplinary work requires significant investment of
time, resources, and personnel to be successful. What is more, aca-
demic incentives may act against transdisciplinary work, requiring
administrators to cooperate in redefining hiring, retention, and
tenure criteria. It may also be a difficult sell to more traditionally
minded faculty who believe that a computer science degree should
focus on getting students to master a wide range of technical skills
to a high degree of ability. These are common challenges across
transdisciplinary endeavours, however. Considering the successes
of transdisciplinary projects in other fields may be instructive to
those seeking an ethical transformation of computer science.
The potential advantages of a transdisciplinary computer ethics
education are significant. A transdisciplinary computer science
and computer ethics education—whether we call it data justice,
responsible computing, or something else—stands perhaps the best
chance of creating technologists who are well-rounded people in the
sense striven for by liberal arts programmes, while also providing
graduates with a robust set of computing skills to enable them
to make positive change with their innovations. In a way, what a
transdisciplinary computer ethics education proposes is a twenty-
first century version of the successful person that Aristotle tells
us is possible only by cultivating the various virtues of character
and intellect [3, 23]. A rough-and-ready summary of Aristotle’s
ethics is that to live a successful life, one must cultivate virtues
of character (e.g. generosity, courage, wit), virtues of intellect (e.g.
knowledge, skill, wisdom), a commitment to justice and civic duty,
and good relations with friends and family. Aristotle thinks this is
best achieved in a life of contemplation—that is to say, of studying
philosophy among like-minded fellows. But a transdisciplinary
responsible computing education—and the transformed computing
professions that graduates thereof may help to produce—could well
be a modern alternative [cf. 13, pp. 16–17].
This raises the worry from Raji et al., mentioned earlier, that
computer ethics education can give the false impression that tech-
nologists should be able to “do it all,” what they describe as “the
engineer’s natural inclination towards seeing themselves as a soli-
tary saviour, to the detriment of the quality of the solution and in
spite of the need for other disciplinary perspectives” [32, p. 515].
They argue against this view of the ideal computing professional as
an “ethical unicorn” who can do all the technical and ethical work
alike, contending that the sorts of ethical issues that computing
professionals now face are more often structural problems that
require structural solutions.
However, we may note that computing is already a large and
complex assemblage of multiple specializations; to make a technol-
ogy well requires a team of experts in several different subfields.
So too with responsible computing and data justice. A transdisci-
plinary computer ethics education programme would be successful
were it to reliably produce experts in computer ethics and experts in
other subfields of computing, each of whom have enough comple-
mentary technical or ethical knowledge to be interactional experts
[9] with the others. A certain baseline level of ethical skill would
be expected of all, but there would remain an important role for
computer ethics specialists, whose backgrounds might be subdi-
vided further into those who focus on philosophy, social science,
area studies, or stakeholder engagement.
8
CONCLUSION
In this paper, I outlined a framework from cross-disciplinary stud-
ies and used it to analyse three different approaches to teaching
computer ethics on the basis of how closely the disciplines of ethics
and computing are integrated. I argued that any computer ethics
curriculum should aim to be at least interdisciplinary, or else it will
fail to meet some of the central learning goals of computer ethics.
I also sketched possibilities for transdisciplinary computer ethics,
which has the potential to launch a new and distinct form of the
computing profession or a specialization within it.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Alison Simmons, Barbara Grosz, Jeff Behrends, Salil
Vadhan, James Mickens, Stephen Chong, Jenna Donohue, William
Cochran, Jill Susarrey, and everyone else in Embedded EthiCS @
Harvard for the collegiality and support that enabled this paper.
Thanks also to Casey Fiesler, Marianna Ganapini, Kristina Striegnitz,
Letitia Meynell, Travis LaCroix, three anonymous reviewers for
SIGCSE, and audiences at Union College and Dalhousie University,
for conversation about these ideas. This paper was written on the
traditional and ancestral territory of the Massachusett people.
Integrating Ethics into Computer Science Education: Multi-, Inter-, and Transdisciplinary Approaches
SIGCSE 2023, March 15–18, 2023, Toronto, ON, Canada
