ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 21 January 2020
doi: 10.3389/feduc.2019.00162
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
1
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Edited by:
Jukka Husu,
University of Turku, Finland
Reviewed by:
Khalil Gholami,
University of Kurdistan, Iran
Tracy X. P. Zou,
The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong
*Correspondence:
Joanna Goode
goodej@uoregon.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Teacher Education,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Education
Received: 29 August 2019
Accepted: 24 December 2019
Published: 21 January 2020
Citation:
Goode J, Skorodinsky M, Hubbard J
and Hook J (2020) Computer Science
for Equity: Teacher Education, Agency,
and Statewide Reform.
Front. Educ. 4:162.
doi: 10.3389/feduc.2019.00162
Computer Science for Equity:
Teacher Education, Agency, and
Statewide Reform
Joanna Goode 1*, Max Skorodinsky 1, Jill Hubbard 2 and James Hook 3
1 Department of Education Studies, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, United States, 2 Department of Computer Science,
Oregon State University-Cascades, Bend, OR, United States, 3 Department of Computer Science, Portland State University,
Portland, OR, United States
This paper reports on a statewide “Computer Science for All” initiative in Oregon
that aims to democratize high school computer science and broaden participation
in an academic subject that is one of the most segregated disciplines nationwide,
in terms of both race and gender. With no statewide policies to support computing
instruction, Oregon’s legacy of computer science education has been marked by both
low participation and by rates of underrepresented students falling well-below the
already dismal national rates. The study outlined in this paper focuses on how teacher
education can support educators in developing knowledge and agency, and impacting
policies and practices that broaden participation in computing. In particular, this research
seeks to understand two questions. First, how do teachers experience equity-focused
professional development in preparation for teaching an introductory course in computer
science? Second, this study queries, how do teachers understand their own agency
in inﬂuencing policies and practices that broaden participation in their speciﬁc schools
and classrooms? To answer these questions, this inquiry employed a mixed method
approach, drawing from surveys, observations, and interview data of two cohorts of
teachers who participated in the Exploring Computer Science professional development
program. To show the variety of school contexts and situate computer science education
in local and place-based policies and practices, three teacher case studies are presented
that illustrate how individual teachers, in diverse geographic and demographic settings,
are building inclusive computer science opportunities in their schools. The ﬁndings reveal
that centering equity-focused teacher professional development supports teachers in
formulating the conﬁdence, knowledge and skills that lead to inclusive computer science
instruction, computer science content, and equity-centered pedagogy. The ﬁndings
also highlight how school reform in computer science requires not only technical and
pedagogical supports and structures, but also a systemic rethinking and reworking of
normative and political forces that are part of the fabric of schools. Based on these
ﬁndings of teacher knowledge and agency, the paper concludes with a presentation
of particular statewide policies and practices that are generative in broadening belief
systems and expanding political capacity of computer science education to reach
all students.
Keywords: computer science education, teacher education, education policy, case studies, equity
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
INTRODUCTION
In early 2016, President Obama endorsed a decade of federal
investment in broadening participation in secondary computer
science education and lit a ﬁrestorm of new eﬀorts aimed at
providing computer science instruction for all students. Despite
the federal directive for funding to contribute to this “Computer
Science for All” initiative, the constitutional mandate in the
United States gives authority to the states to set education policies
and practices. While the recent wave of federal support to bring
computing knowledge to all students is unprecedented, it is
evident that reforming computer science education must be
attended to at the state level.
The urgency of expanding computer science education in the
United States has been endorsed and supported by a variety of
organizations and interest groups. Industry leaders, concerned
about the future health of the work-force pipeline and personal
economic prosperity, suggest that public investment to support
computer science in schools is necessary for the nation’s (and
individuals’) economic health. Cybersecurity experts point to
the need for a well-educated citizenry to ensure both personal
privacy, and to ﬁll public sector jobs in security which cannot
be outsourced abroad. Academic groups highlight the beneﬁts
of a “computer science + X” approach—education about how
computer science can inform scientiﬁc and humanistic endeavors
across and within other scholarly disciplines. Additionally, K-
12 educators and teachers note that the ethos of creativity and
collaboration that can be fostered through computer science
instruction has a reinvigorating and empowering impact on
teaching and learning in classrooms.
Inequitable Opportunities to Learn
Computer Science
Despite the widespread enthusiasm for computer science
education for all, it is signiﬁcant and troubling that computer
science suﬀers from the lowest participation of girls and students
of color than any other STEM-related area. These participation
patterns continue, and often increase, in higher education
and in technology-related professions (U.S. Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, 2016; Zweban and Bizot, 2018). Given
the high-status nature of computer science (Apple, 1978), and
the tremendous levels of power and inﬂuence that lie with those
who have stature in this ﬁeld, computer science education reform
must prioritize to address the complex ways that racial and
gender inequities operate and are reproduced in this discipline.
Prior research in equity and computer science has illuminated
how structural and belief systems collide to create obstacles
for many students to learn computing in schools. For instance,
an ethnographic study focused on computer science education,
across three high schools varying in demographic composition,
revealed how learning opportunities, such as course oﬀerings
and qualiﬁed teachers, diﬀered dramatically both between and
within schools (Goode, 2008; Margolis et al., 2017). Additionally,
educator beliefs and practices, at the school and classroom level,
profoundly impacted students’ opportunities to learn computer
science through student tracking and enacted pedagogy in the
classroom. This collision of structural and belief system biases
in computing education result in signiﬁcant and persistent
participation gaps in computer science courses by students of
color and girls (Ashcraft et al., 2017; Scott et al., 2019).
Further, for students of color and low-income students,
existing discrepancies in opportunities to learn computer science
in school settings are accompanied and compounded by other
long-standing educational inequities. Studies have documented
how across subject-areas, secondary students in the United States
experience staggering disparities in access to high-quality
teachers (Darling-Hammond and Berry, 2006), high-quality
academic curricular experiences (Lee et al., 1997), and culturally
relevant pedagogy (Ladson-Billings, 1995).
The Role of Teachers in Computer Science
for All
There has been an ongoing and signiﬁcant investment in
expanding and scaling computer science education as part
of the “Computer Science for All” initiative across the
United States. Although teacher professional development is
frequently considered integral to these eﬀorts, there is scarce
research about the speciﬁc role of teachers in serving as change
agents in broadening participation in computing at their school
sites. Little is known about how teachers can support rigorous
and inclusive computer science course oﬀerings. Such knowledge
is especially necessary in order to best support eﬀorts to diversify
high school computer science classrooms in a state with a
decentralized, “local control” education system. This study seeks
to study how teachers develop and enact agency in terms of
equity in computer science education. In particular, this research
seeks to understand how teachers experience the equity-focus
of professional development in preparation for teaching a high
school introductory course in computer science, and how these
teachers understand their own capacity in bringing computer
science to their speciﬁc schools and classrooms and to diverse
groups of students. A key part of our investigation is studying
how belief systems of educators and policymakers shift as
computer science education discourse collectively shifts from
“for some” to “for all.”
Studying teacher agency in the context of educational reform
involves an examination of the actions of individual educators
within particular social contexts marked by a set of resources
that are culturally, socially, and historically developed (Lasky,
2005). This sociocultural model of teacher agency is mediated
by the interaction between the individual and the structures
impacting teachers’ capability to exercise power, particularly
in reform contexts that bring new normative professional
tools and expectations. Further, an ecological theory of teacher
agency suggests that while teachers as actors have some sort of
capacities, their ability to achieve agency relies on the interaction
between these capacities and the ecological contingencies of
the environment (Biesta and Tedder, 2007). One study of
teacher-enacted curriculum reform that examined teacher agency
from an ecological perspective found that teacher agency is
largely about “repertoires for maneuverer,” or the possibilities for
diﬀerent forms of action available for teachers in their particular
temporal, material, and social context (Priestley et al., 2012).
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
2
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
This study discovered that the beliefs, values, and attributes that
individual teachers mobilize in particular settings are important
characteristics of teacher agency. The recommendations from
this research emphasized that educational curricular reforms
should focus on designing policies that proactively consider
teachers’ preemptive and anticipated engagement with new
educational designs.
Computer Science for Oregon
The study outlined in this paper is part of a larger initiative
that supports cohorts of teachers in bringing computer science
education to Oregon, a state with a decentralized school system.
Through support from the National Science Foundation and
collaborations with multiple state policymakers and educators,
the “Computer Science for Oregon” initiative is expanding access
to inclusive learning experiences, beginning with high school
classrooms. At the core of the theory of change for this equity-
focused project is teacher education. Teachers not only have
the unique and central position to bring active and inclusive
pedagogy to introductory courses for all students, but they also
hold the capacity, expertise, and agency to illuminate how local
and statewide policies and practices can support and sustain
social justice approaches to computing education.
To situate the equity context of schools in this study, this
paper ﬁrst provides an historical examination of the legacy of
computer science education in Oregon and how these eﬀorts,
in the past, have reached only a narrow segment of the student
population. Next, we engage in a theoretical discussion of the
multiple components of school reform that must be attended to
in order to center race and gender equity at the core of computer
science school reform. Then, we describe the “Computer Science
for Oregon” initiative and the role of teacher education in
supporting the statewide goal to democratize computer science
education. To examine the eﬃcacy of these reform eﬀorts, we
present three case studies to illustrate how teachers, in diverse
geographic and demographic settings, are building inclusive
computer science opportunities at their schools. Each of these
case studies features the teacher’s school site context, their
particular problems of practice in teaching computer science to
a wide diversity of students, and how they have experienced
powerful moments of teaching and learning that support the
inclusive spirit of “Computer Science for All.” After presenting
these particular cases, we will discuss how our ﬁndings can
inform an applied theory of action for “Computer Science for
All” statewide eﬀorts focused on a cohesive model of social
justice-focused educational reform.
BACKGROUND OF COMPUTER SCIENCE
EDUCATION IN OREGON
To provide a comprehensive understanding of the current
context of Oregon’s computer science education opportunities,
policies, and practices, we present an historical inquiry of
how computing has been integrated in Oregon schools. Using
public education datasets, College Board data, and archival state
documents, we examined patterns of course participation by
racial and gender demographics. We also investigated available
historical plans and policies. We observe how key events,
organizations, and enrollment data have set the stage for the
“Computer Science for Oregon” shift toward a focus on a more
widespread adoption of computer science education oﬀerings, as
well as, on the inclusion and engagement of a diverse student
body in the computing ﬁeld.
Teacher Role and Course Availability
Oregon has a long history teaching computer science in formal
(in-school) and informal (out-of-school-time) settings. By 1962,
Oregon high school teachers were teaching programming. In
1978 Mr. Robert Jaquiss, a computer teacher at North Salem
High School, developed a proposal to achieve “computer literacy
for all” (Bennett et al., 1980). That proposal shows problem
solving and simulation integrated into the study of social science,
chemistry, physics, business, biology, mathematics, and music,
and identiﬁed separate courses of study for programming,
computer science, and computer operations. The Oregon
Computer Science Teachers Association (OCSTA) formed in
1987. It has thrived as a partnership between educators and
industry to support computer science content in formal and
informal settings. Despite this long-standing niche of proponents
for computer science education, no district in the state has
yet designated computer science as a graduation requirement.
Because computer science has historically been on the periphery
of the school curriculum, Oregon, like many states, does not
have a certiﬁcation available in the discipline for teachers.
In order to teach computer science at the secondary level,
teachers who are already certiﬁed and hold endorsements in
other subjects, often are asked or choose to obtain professional
learning in the subject in short-term workshops (often only
available during summer break months). Additionally, many
computing teachers are former technology professionals who
have entered the teaching profession as part of a Career-
Technical Education program, circumventing traditional teacher
education preparation programs that include teaching methods
courses. This uneven pipeline of computing teacher preparation
has resulted in a dearth of educators prepared to oﬀer computer
science in Oregon high schools. Additionally, there is wide
variability of the types of computer science courses that are
available across the state. Of the 325 Oregon high schools
reporting data to the Oregon Department of Education for
the academic year ending 2015, 232 listed some computing
or technology course, 66 listed a regular oﬀering coded
as programming, and 14 oﬀered Advanced Placement or
International Baccalaureate computer science classes.
Course-Taking
With respect to course-taking, the state has suﬀered from years of
low participation in computer science from almost all students,
though students of color and girls are notably absent from most
of these legacy “for some” courses. Student enrollment data
from historic courses, as well as the new Advanced Placement
Computer Science Principles course, highlights both the overall,
drastically low participation, as well as the homogenous
participation in terms of student demographic groups (College
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
3
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
Board, 2018). In 2017–2018, while students participated in
taking over 137,000 exams nationwide, only 762 Oregon students
participated in one of the two Advanced Placement Computer
Science course exams. Of these Oregon students, only 10% of
exam-takers were students of color, and just 23% identiﬁed as
female. Statewide, only one Native American girl, one Black girl,
two Native Hawaiian or Paciﬁc Islander girls, and 12 Latina girls
participated in one of the two Advanced Placement exams.
Attending to the Participation Gap
It is clear that the computer science education eﬀorts and
course oﬀerings in Oregon to date have not been productive in
broadening participation in computing in the state. With over 50
years of experimentation, signiﬁcant demand from parents and
persistent appeal for more computer science educated graduates
from Oregon’s technology industry, educators might wonder
why the state failed to implement Jaquiss’ vision from 1978
of “Computer Literacy for All.” In part, the evidence shows
that because the inclusion of computer science has historically
been viewed predominantly as an opt-in oﬀering for suburban
schools, its enrichment program status has prevented the subject
from becoming part of the generally available comprehensive
school curriculum (Margolis et al., 2017). Further, Oregon is
the only state in the United States that does not have any
statewide policies that support K-12 statewide computer science
education, such as continued funding, teacher certiﬁcation,
a state plan, state standards, allowing computer science to
count for graduation requirements, or a state director that
oversees computer science instruction and learning in schools
(Code.org, CSTA and ECEP, 2019).
As a state, Oregon is uniquely situated for a “Computer
Science for All” movement focused on implementing and
sustaining computer science courses in high schools. There is a
longstanding legacy of past computer science state investments
and active teacher involvement in computer science education.
Yet, the pressing equity gaps in computer science education
in Oregon show extreme disparities in participation amongst
Oregon’s students that suggest a new approach for expanding
computer science education is needed. For Oregon, this includes
addressing not only gender, racial, and social class disparities,
but also diﬀerences in opportunities to learn along the urban-
suburban-rural divide.
Broadening Participation in Computer
Science in Oregon
Computer Science for every student, thus, requires a more
disruptive implementation approach than simply providing more
opportunities for computing education as opt-in enrichment.
This necessitates a shift from the historic viewing of computer
science as appropriate in some schools, for a handful of students,
toward a normative view of computer science as a subject for
every student across the state. The thesis of this theory is that
such a disruption in the implementation of computer science
education is ultimately more sustainable in reaching equitable
learning opportunities for students.
The “Computer Science for Oregon” program began in 2017
with goals of diversifying and expanding computer science
learning opportunities for students in urban, suburban, and rural
areas across the state. With support from the “Computer Science
for All” program at the National Science Foundation, a major
part of this initiative focuses on supporting high school teachers
in developing the capacity to teach the introductory year-long
Exploring Computer Science course at their schools.
The Exploring Computer Science program, with over a
decade of research documenting its eﬀectiveness in engaging
diverse groups of students in learning about computing,
provides a comprehensive and inquiry-based approach to
introducing high school students to computer science. Along
with instructional lesson plans for teachers to use, that include a
comprehensive approach to computing, the Exploring Computer
Science program oﬀers an intensive, long-term professional
development program. Teachers participating in the professional
development program of Exploring Computer Science ﬁrst
attend a week-long summer Institute, then participate in
quarterly learning sessions taken while teaching the course
during the ﬁrst year, and then participate in a second week-
long summer Institute. The second summer professional learning
experience allows for teachers to reﬂect on their ﬁrst year of
teaching and continue to grow their knowledge around eﬀective
instructional practices.
The core features of the Exploring Computer Science
professional development program include introducing teachers
to key lessons in the curriculum, incorporating a rehearsal-
based approach to learning computing concepts and pedagogy,
and centering discussions about racial inequities in computer
science education (Goode et al., 2014). Further, this professional
development has been shown to foster a vibrant professional
learning community of teachers (Ryoo et al., 2015).
To participate in the professional development program, a
school’s principal signs an agreement to oﬀer the Exploring
Computer Science course in the school curriculum and agrees
to a school-wide commitment to recruit a wide diversity of
students to the course. So far, two cohorts, and a total of
40 teachers, have begun or completed the 2-years Exploring
Computer Science professional development program focused
on learning introductory computer science concepts, inquiry-
based teaching methodologies, and strategies for teaching
for equity and inclusion. In Oregon, the summer Exploring
Computer Science professional development workshop takes
place annually in a residential college setting in central Oregon.
Subsequent quarterly professional developments are conducted
during the school year, in an online setting. This is to ensure
ease of participation as teachers in the program come from
geographically disparate locations.
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES OF
SCHOOL REFORM TO ADDRESS EQUITY
This study draws from school reform literature to help
examine how teachers can be central to eﬀorts for broadening
participation in computing, in the context of a statewide
initiative. Given that “Computer Science for All” is part of
the ubiquitous democratic “for all” movement in education,
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
4
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
it is useful to examine the scholarship from similar “for all”
detracking eﬀorts that have aspired to democratize access to
school knowledge.
In his scholarship on education policies and the rhetoric
of standards for all in England, Gillborn (2005) argues that
by placing race equity at the margins of reform, educational
policies retain, and extend race injustice that ﬁrmly remains at
the center of the reform. Gillborn points out that systematic
advantages for White students are based in a form of tacit
intentionality of power-holders. He argues that white supremacy
is often maintained and reproduced through the taken-for-
granted privileging of white interests that often goes unexamined
when creating educational policies. Thus, for eﬀorts “for all”
to be eﬀective in reaching goals of inclusion and social justice,
race equity must be considered at the center of reform strategies
and goals.
Because expanding opportunities for computing education
beyond enrichment and toward for all students is complex
and involves changing the distribution of resources as well
as changing the hearts and minds of educators, we employ
Oakes’ (1992) framework for understanding and changing
school dynamics to promote racial, socioeconomic, and gender
equity in course-taking. Oakes proposes attending to three
dimensions of change that inﬂuence the social organization
of schools: the technical, normative, and political elements of
school reform. Further, given the empirical base highlighting the
inﬂuence of teacher quality on students’ opportunities to learn
(Darling-Hammond, 2008), we extend Oakes’ theoretical frame
to highlight the empirical data suggesting the importance of a
fourth dimension: pedagogy (Goode et al., 2018).
Technical
By technical, Oakes refers to the structure of curriculum
diﬀerentiation—including
the
curriculum,
systems
of
diﬀerentiation to determine tracks of students, and the existence
of college preparation and non-college preparatory tracks at a
school site. As documented in Stuck in the Shallow End (Margolis
et al., 2017), course demographics are closely correlated with the
relative rigor and prestige of computing courses—low-income
students and students of color are often relegated to low-level
computer literacy courses, while middle-class students, typically
boys, represent the majority of Advanced Placement Computer
Science A course-takers. This is reﬂected in Advanced Placement
Computer Science A and Computer Science Principles exam
statistics in Oregon and nationwide, which reveal that computer
science has the lowest rates of female and marginalized minority
participation out of all Advanced Placement STEM-related
courses (Martin et al., 2015; College Board, 2018).
Normative
Addressing the normative dimension of computer science
education reform includes attending to the web of cultural
assumptions about what is true and “normal” and what
constitutes appropriate action given these belief systems.
Computer science is one of the ﬁelds most deﬁned by
stereotypes and belief systems that undercut the participation
of African Americans, Latinx, Native Americans, females, and
other marginalized groups. An important normative perspective
in computing education is the concept of “preparatory privilege,”
a phenomenon in which childhood enrichment experiences and
familial social capital are mistaken by educators for “innate”
ability and suitability for studying more computing (Margolis
et al., 2017). Students without such experiences, including low-
income students, students of color, and girls, are then labeled
as not being able or suitable for even introductory computer
science courses (Goode et al., 2006). Since educators, including
counselors and administrators, uphold these normative belief
systems at school, district, and state levels, these belief systems
both inﬂuence and are inﬂuenced by policy and practice within a
particular state or regional context (Hu et al., 2016).
Political
The political dimension includes how labels, status diﬀerences,
and the signiﬁcance of these systems are codiﬁed in schooling
policies in ways that inﬂuence opportunities for academic
and occupational attainment. Oakes (1992) notes the political
dimension captures the ongoing struggle for individuals and
groups to raise their own relative advantage in the distribution
of school resources and opportunities through the development
of policies that determine who receives ﬁscal and human
resources that sustain quality eﬀective teaching and learning.
Considering the political dimension of computer science
education also involves tracking which teachers are permitted
to teach secondary computer science education and relatedly,
how computer science counts—if it counts toward graduation
or college admissions, or as a course on a Career-Technical
Education pathway, and for which students (Lang et al., 2013;
Kaczmarczyk et al., 2014).
Inclusive Pedagogy
Yet, equity is not frequently at the core of professional learning
programs for teachers in computer science. A recent study
of computer science teachers noted that only 16% of teachers
consider themselves very well-prepared to incorporate students’
cultural backgrounds into computer science instruction (Gordon
and Heck, 2019). Building the professional capacity of teachers
is essential so that all students have teachers who are able to
incorporate the essential ingredients of an engaging and inclusive
pedagogy in computer science courses. Darling-Hammond
(2008) has indicated that teacher quality and preparation is
the most important school-level inﬂuence on student learning,
and that highly qualiﬁed teachers in core subject areas were
inequitably distributed amongst schools. Research on computer
science teacher preparation has demonstrated the importance of
building the conceptual knowledge, inquiry-based pedagogy, and
equitable teaching practices of computing teachers for improving
learning experiences for students (Margolis et al., 2014). Further,
long-term professional development programs foster the growth
of dynamic professional learning communities of teachers
instructing the same course, allowing for shared knowledge
and in-depth discussion of teaching strategies, student work,
and assessment (Ryoo et al., 2015). Peer-coaching programs
have shown to be eﬀective in its on-site model of professional
support to novice computing teachers as they work toward
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
5
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
developing engaging and inclusive pedagogy for all students
(Margolis et al., 2015).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The mixed method study outlined in this paper focuses on
how teachers, with the support of an in-service professional
development program and a “for all” attentive curriculum,
can inﬂuence and drive regional and statewide computer
science reform.
Research Questions
This study probes the professional learning experiences of
teachers as they begin teaching a high school introductory course
in computer science, and how these teachers understand their
own agency and capacity in bringing computer science to their
speciﬁc schools and classrooms and to diverse groups of students.
Speciﬁcally, we asked:
1. How do teachers experience a residential computer science
professional development program that infuses equity into the
core teacher learning curriculum?
2. How do teachers understand their own agency in
inﬂuencing computer science education policies and enacting
educational practices that broaden participation in computing?
Participants
To address these questions, we involved 29 teacher participants
attending summer Exploring Computer Science professional
development in the research study examining their knowledge
and agency around improving access and equity in computer
science education. About half of these teachers were ﬁrst-year
Exploring Computer Science teachers who were preparing to
teach the course for the ﬁrst time the following school year, the
remainder of teachers were part of the ﬁrst cohort of teachers
who were participating in the professional development for their
second year after teaching the course for the ﬁrst time at their
schools. All except for one of the teacher participants noted
that they had approached their school administration to seek
permission to teach Exploring Computer Science and participate
in professional development as part of the “Computer Science for
Oregon” initiative.
Data Sources
We collected 25 pre-professional development surveys and
29 post-professional development surveys from participating
teachers. Four of the teacher participants did not ﬁll out a pre-
survey, but did complete the post-survey. There was no attrition
of participants during the week of professional development.
The reliability and validity of these survey instruments has
been established with consistent and theoretically meaningful
outcomes across multiple uses of these survey items with
participants over the course of many years (Goode et al., 2014;
Ryoo et al., 2015). Face validity has been strengthened through
the central involvement of educational researchers and experts in
computer science education further reviewing these survey items.
To center the ﬁrst research question in this study about
teacher’s professional learning experiences, we report only on the
items that measured teachers’ growth and dispositions toward
equity and inclusion that emerged through their participation
in this professional learning workshop. To this end, we focus
on a few individual survey items that query teachers’ conﬁdence
and knowledge around equity and inclusion. Further, open-
ended observations during the course of the week of professional
development provided another source of data to triangulate
research ﬁndings around teacher learning, teacher agency, and
broadening participation in computing.
Over the course of the prior school year and during summer
professional development, we also collected a series of interview
data with eight ﬁrst-year Exploring Computer Science teachers,
both before and after they initially taught Exploring Computer
Science. In all, the second-year Exploring Computer Science
teachers noted they had taught 640 students in Exploring
Computer Science during the 2018–19 school year. All but one of
these teachers returned for a second year of Exploring Computer
Science professional development. Our data collection focused
on capturing teachers’ experiences, beliefs, and attitudes about
increasing access to computer science instruction in high schools.
These interviews were semi-structured and lasted for 30–60 min
each. For second-year Exploring Computer Science teachers,
we were particularly interested in teachers’ implementation of
an equity-oriented course within the particular community and
school context that teachers work in to capture the diversity of
strategies, policies, and practices that these educators perceived
to support all students in Oregon. We analyzed these interviews
using thematic codes that emerged from examining the technical,
political, normative, and pedagogical categories of teaching
computer science in schools.
Case Study Analysis
To examine in detail the second research question that
queries how teachers advocate for equity-based policies and
enact equitable teaching practices to support computer science
education at their schools, we compiled case studies of three of
these educators. Case studies are used to present the school-site
experiences of teachers as this method allows for “an empirical
inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon within its
real-life context; when the boundaries between phenomenon and
context are not clearly evident; and in which multiple sources of
evidence are used” (Yin, 1984, p. 23). That is, school reform is
inherently context-dependent, and understanding the interaction
between structures, policies, and individual teacher and student
experiences requires an examination of policies and practices as
enacted in particular sociocultural communities. The data for the
three case studies presented in this paper is drawn from multiple
sources, including a series of interviews and surveys over the
course of 13 months.
In creating case studies, we focused on more in-depth
examinations of individual teachers’ experiences, using data
collected from three of the participants who had recently
completed their ﬁrst year of teaching the Exploring Computer
Science course with professional development support. All of
these teachers were part of the ﬁrst cohort of “Computer
Science for Oregon” teachers. These three teachers were
selected as focal case studies based on their own personal
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
6
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
and professional backgrounds and the range of geography and
student demographics in the communities in which they work.
We also were purposeful in our sampling to highlight areas
typically overlooked in computer science education scholarship.
For instance, as rural schools are often underrepresented in
education policy, we include two diﬀerent rural areas as
cases to shed additional light on the particular needs and
opportunities that might take place outside of urban and
suburban schools.
RESULTS
Professional Learning Community Fosters
Equitable Teaching Disposition
Our investigation into the ﬁrst research question, how teachers
experienced professional learning in Exploring Computer
Science
professional
development,
revealed
that
teachers
found value in this space, speciﬁcally in terms of increasing
their knowledge of content, pedagogical skills, and equitable
approaches to recruiting and retaining diverse students in
their introductory computer science classes. Overall, in our
analysis of surveys, we found that teachers highly regarded
the
residential
setting
and
community-focused
approach
to the professional development, with teachers noting that
“collaborating with peers” was extremely valuable, and as one
teacher stated, an “important activity for my learning during this
week was time spent outside the classroom with other teachers,
especially conversations with second-year Exploring Computer
Science teachers.”
In fact, though teacher isolation is often reported by
the nation’s computer science teachers, after a week of
residential professional development, 96% of teachers reported
feeling connected to the computing education community in
Oregon and the Exploring Computer Science teacher group.
Further, this collegial approach to teacher learning deepened
teachers’ own understandings of how equity, inquiry-based
teaching methodologies, and computer science concepts can
be interwoven. One teacher, in reporting about how she had
previously struggled with the design of a lesson, reported that she
had learned from a peer group of teachers about new strategies
for the lesson that would support equity and student engagement,
noting, “The method that this group used was really helpful to
me. Actually, several lessons worked out that way this year. I got
new perspectives and multiple ways to present lessons. I loved
having the opportunity to work with my old cohort and the new.
It was great energy and a fantastic group dynamic.”
In describing their own learning and perspective around
equity that emerged during the professional development
workshop, teachers suggested that they already had varying
degrees of familiarity with the equity issues in computer science,
they grew in their thinking and skills. Upon reﬂection, teachers
noted the following technical, normative, and pedagogical ways
that their understandings of equity shifted as a result of
participating in this professional development. None of the
teachers addressed political dimensions in their comments
about their growth in thinking about computing and equity,
instead, they focused on technical, normative, and pedagogical
considerations when talking about their growth. They noted:
Technical Dimensions Such as Course Availability
• Equity in computer science is a huge issue, especially at the
college and professional level. I now have a more holistic view
of the barriers preventing certain groups from entering the ﬁeld
and staying in the ﬁeld. Exploring Computer Science is the class
that opens the door for a lot of students that would previously
be shut out. We need more comprehensive representation in
computer science if the solutions for today’s problems are
going to be solved in a way that helps everyone and doesn’t
unintentionally exclude others.
• Creating supports to allow anyone to experience computer
science as a potential pathway.
• Computer science at least as an introductory class must be
taught to all students.
Normative Dimension Such as Misperceptions and
Bias
• I believe teachers have to be more active and promote this class
as one for ALL students. Many students will miss out if they feel
they are not qualiﬁed. Too many opportunities are missed by
students to take computer science due to a misunderstanding of
the curriculum and preconceived racial/gender biases.
• I feel more strongly than ever that computer science needs to
change and become more diverse. This professional development
reinforces my commitment.
Pedagogical Dimension
• This training provided some great insight on improving my
practice with equity and inquiry.
• I now know that it is possible to create a curriculum that is
taught through exposing kids to culture.
• I have a better understanding of what equity looks like as far as
classroom instruction and student participation
• It is something that needs to be monitored and thought about
each lesson.
Importantly, several teachers noted that while their perspectives
haven’t shifted because “they were already there” in terms of
their consideration of equity, a few noted that they came up with
“new ways to buck the trend” and collected new tools to back
up their equity thinking and practices. One teacher, as part of
the ﬁrst cohort who was experiencing their second summer in
Exploring Computer Science professional development, reﬂected
that the ﬁrst professional development had the most impact,
stating, “Not much change in thinking this year, but I had a huge
shift in perspective last year.” Yet, most second-year teachers
reported how their knowledge and agency around addressing
equity issues in their own professional practice had deepened,
including their repertoire of inclusive recruitment strategies and
pedagogical practices.
Descriptive quantitative measures also demonstrate overall
increases in how participating teachers reported their own
conﬁdence
in
their
pedagogical
knowledge,
curricular
knowledge, and equitable practices for teaching the course
as a result of participating in Exploring Computer Science
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
7
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
TABLE 1 | Teachers’ conﬁdence as reported in pre- and post-professional
development surveys.
Conﬁdence
Using
inquiry-
based
strategies
Teaching
computer
science
concepts
Using equitable
practices to
support student
learning
Pre-professional
development conﬁdent
or very conﬁdent
79%
55%
66%
Post-professional
development conﬁdent
or very conﬁdent
90%
76%
79%
professional
development.
Table 1
compares
the
rates
of participants who noted they felt “conﬁdent” or “very
conﬁdent” in using inquiry-based teaching strategies, teaching
computing concepts, and using equitable practices to support
student learning. As Table 1 demonstrates, post-professional
development reports showed dramatically higher rates of
conﬁdence across these three focal areas. Of course, these results
might be expected after an intensive learning experience, though
when interpreted alongside observations and interview data,
these survey results reinforce that teachers reported growth in all
three areas of focus, including equity.
Case Studies
To study the second research question about teacher agency and
enactment of equitable policies and practices, we oﬀer three cases
studies of teachers situated in their own school contexts. In each
of these cases, we detail how teachers understand their own
agency in inﬂuencing computer science education policies and
inclusive educational practices that impact their own classrooms,
especially in terms of broadening participation in computing.
Riverway High School
Carol has been a teacher at Riverway for 10 years. She
holds endorsements in science, general science, biology and
intermediate mathematics. Last year, she taught one section
of Exploring Computer Science, three sections of science, and
one section of a college-preparatory advising course, AVID.
Riverway, a high school of under a thousand students, is the
most diverse school in the state of Oregon, and an AVID Site of
Distinction. Carol explains that most of the students at Riverway
“are coming from poverty, they would be ﬁrst-generation post-
secondary students, especially graduating from post-secondary,
most parents have low levels of education.” Sixty-nine percent
of the school’s students are from minoritized groups, 45 percent
are students of color. Many students are recent immigrants or
are children of immigrants. The student body represents over
one hundred nationalities, whose ﬂags are proudly on display in
the school cafeteria. The school supports a signiﬁcant number
of English Language Learners. Carol describes her teaching style
as student-centered. To her it is more important to focus on
how she will teach, rather than what she will teach. She focuses
on high engagement best practices, collaboration, hands-on,
movement, games—loading “creative fun.” She spends a lot of
time establishing relationships with students.
Carol is a steadfast advocate for the students at Riverview,
especially urging the need and importance of introductory
computer science courses. She explains: “... as a teacher in a
diverse school, I have this [...] understanding of the opportunities
for the careers that are available for kids. And right now, the
computer industry is expanding at a rate that is unbelievable.
And there are jobs, really good, high paying jobs ...if they can
build the skills in order to attain them.” She further states, “I want
people to know that they [the students at Riverview] are all really
excited about learning and they are all really excited about their
future. ... so, our kids, they have dreams and they have goals,
and they want to get there, they just, a lot of them, they don’t
have that knowledge, and their family know how.” She adds, “we
need to make sure that we are providing real opportunities to
learn computer science, especially in underfunded schools and
[...] our kids are ready and they are worth it and they deserve
the opportunity.” Carol devotes a great deal of her time to
encouraging and supporting individual students, ensuring that
they succeed in her Exploring Computer Science class.
In the 2018–19 academic year, Riverway introduced Exploring
Computer Science as an alternative to a required physical
science course. The course fulﬁlled a science requirement
option for freshman. This came as a mandate from the school
district’s upper administration. As the school’s Science faculty
was not given an opportunity to weigh in, the rollout of
Exploring Computer Science as a physical science alternative
was contentious. Because it fulﬁlled a school requirement,
three sections of the course were oﬀered. It saw participation
from demographics closely resembling that of the school.
Carol reports that the equity-focused pedagogical strategies for
teaching computer science she was introduced to during the
Exploring Computer Science professional development kept
students highly engaged and they enjoyed the class. She was
able to see that with an appropriate curriculum and intentional
pedagogy all students could be successful in an introductory
computer science course.
Despite having a high level of student engagement and
being a good ﬁt for the high school district’s commitment to
equity, Exploring Computer Science has been reclassiﬁed as one
option for receiving science credit, though not required, for
the following academic year. Carol reports that due to it being
an elective, the class was poorly advertised and drew smaller
enrollment numbers. Although the school saw an increase in
Advanced Placement computer science enrollment, which Carol
attributes to a successful launch of Exploring Computer Science,
the course oﬀerings have been reduced to two smaller sections,
diminishing the “for all” momentum built during the prior year.
Riverway is an example of political barriers to implementing
“Computer Science for All.” Even though the school district’s
administration embraced the “for all” tenet for computer science
education, there was a lack of buy-in from the science department
faculty, who were impacted by the top-down mandate to count
Exploring Computer Science as a science credit alternative. As
identiﬁed in Priestley et al. (2012), this teacher’s eﬀorts were
constrained by the “temporal, material, and social context”
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
8
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
created by administrative decisions. When teachers are not
empowered to collaborate on situating computer science in
a school, the sustainability of well-meaning eﬀorts and hard-
earned successes are jeopardized.
Villa High School
Maye has been teaching computer science for over a decade.
She immigrated to the United States from the Middle East,
where she had earned a Master’s degree in computer science.
After immigrating, she considered working in the technology
industry, but decided to instead focus on raising her children.
She entered the teaching profession once her children were older
and began her career as a Math teacher. Villa High School,
where Maye teaches, is located in a town of 55,000 residents.
The school serves about 2,300 students: 30% Latinx, 1% Black,
60% qualify for free and reduced lunch, and many students are
English Learners. Maye took over computer science classes at
Villa from another teacher and immediately fell in love. The
classes which she inherited exclusively focused on programming
and game development.
Maye quickly noticed that the students who enrolled in her
computer science classes were mostly white boys. She decided
to focus on shifting the demographics. To this end, she started
introducing computer science to middle school students during
Villa’s Summer STEM camps, intended to introduce students
to high school oﬀerings. She targeted a camp that focused on
girls and another that focused on children of migrant workers.
Maye developed a 1-day computer science introduction which
she states was meant to address misconceptions about the subject
being just game programming. She also searched out and adapted
an introduction to computer science curriculum. She chose
Exploring Computer Science because of its equity and inclusive
pedagogy focus. She saw a shift in demographics of students
taking the introduction to computer science course but there was
also high attrition. She is currently working on a multiple-day
introduction that will do 1 day of art, 1 day of storytelling and
animation, and 2 days of programming games. Maye is passionate
about the need to oﬀer computer science to all students. She
states: “because it’s problem-solving skills, it’s literacy, it’s reading
and writing and attention to detail [...] computer science is not
just programming, it is in every aspect of life.”
Over the past several years Maye has developed a computer
science Career-Technical Education pathway at Villa which
covers introduction to computer science (Exploring Computer
Science), programming in Visual Basic, advanced programming
in C++, dual-enrollment computer programming courses
(students are able to earn high school and Community College
credit at the same time), and Advanced Placement Computer
Science Principles. Maye reports that students can take computer
science even if they are not in the pathway, but most don’t. The
computer science classes count toward the school’s certiﬁcate of
Career-Technical Education pathway completion or can count
as electives. Maye is deeply involved in the leadership of state’s
Computer Science Teachers Association. She works tirelessly on
changing the misconception about computer science. She feels
that many students don’t really understand what they are going to
learn when they sign up for the introduction to computer science
class. They think they will just be making video games. They
are surprised that there is math, problem-solving, collaboration,
writing, doing things with pen and paper and not necessarily on a
computer. She has been speaking with other teachers, counselors
and administrators to address their misconceptions about the
course so that they are able to prepare students for what they will
be experiencing in the class.
Maye strongly believes that all students can succeed in a
computer science course if they have a clear understanding
of the nature of the course and are well-supported. However,
she is the only teacher at Villa who teaches computer science.
Students who are considering the computer science Career-
Technical Education are choosing between ﬁfteen Career-
Technical Education pathway oﬀerings. Although Maye supports
the computer science for all eﬀort, at Villa, only a small number
of students have the opportunity to take computer science. This
is an example of the technical and normative dimension of
computer science education. As pointed to in Lasky (2005), here,
teacher agency is constrained by structural policies of the school.
Because at Villa computer science is relegated to a career track,
it is predominantly available to students who either self-select
the track or are recruited based on beliefs about who can and
should do computer science. Rather than providing computer
science education for all, Villa remains a school that maintains
the normative view that computer science is for some.
Cornerstone High School
Luis began his teaching career in Mexico City, Mexico. He came
to teach by invitation from a friend. He was studying for a
bachelor’s degree in architecture, when a friend who was teaching
at a private school in Mexico City asked if he would like to teach.
Luis replied that he didn’t have any teaching experience, but
the friend told him that the school would support him, and he
started teaching in a middle school. His ﬁrst class was computers.
He later graduated with a bachelor’s degree in Architectural
Engineering and a minor in teaching. In the US, his degree from
Mexico transferred and he has been teaching math and science.
In Mexico, before coming to the US, he was teaching at a high
school. He taught in the occupational track, classes focused on
architectural engineering and construction. He also taught art
classes at the university. During the 2018–19 academic year, Luis
and another teacher at Cornerstone each taught a section of
Exploring Computer Science for the ﬁrst time. The course will be
oﬀered again next year and both teachers are excited to continue
teaching computer science at the school.
Cornerstone High School, where Luis teaches Math, Science,
AVID and Exploring Computer Science, is a Spanish-English
bilingual public charter school. It is located in a rural town,
with about 11,000 residents. The school has a history with the
local Latinx community and has a large population of Latinx
students. It is a K-12 school and most students have been at
the school from an early age. Luis reports that the students at this
school have been working at becoming bilingual since elementary
school. “Part of the motivation of our principal is to create a
culture ... a bilingual culture.” There are 64 students in the high
school. According to Luis, it is important for students to learn
computer science because it is everywhere. In his case, he thinks
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
9
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
that learning computer science opened doors for him and has
helped him not only in his career but also in his daily life. Luis sees
it as a subject that can open doors for students as it did for him.
He states, “[i]f we are trying to help our students to overcome
from that economic situation that they are living with, it could
open some doors for them ... they could be ready for college.”
Additionally, he is aware that there are people out there who
would enjoy knowing the behind the scenes of computers, how
they work, who would not normally have the opportunity to, and
“since that’s what our school is all about ... we got a lot of girls,
high Latinx population, and these are traditionally underserved
in the computer industry, why not introduce them and see if this
is a thing they would love.”
Cornerstone is an example of a sustainable computer science
for all approach. Both Luis and his colleague individually
approached the school principal and advocated for the need to
have an introductory computer science course at the school.
His colleague had previously done Hour of Code activities at
the high school but they both believed that they needed a
more sustained course. Luis also felt that the school needed an
engaging and supportive introductory course. Their principal
contacted the Oregon Department of Education about available
curriculum and was told about the Exploring Computer
Science Professional Development program, which focused on
supporting Oregon teachers. Luis and the colleague attended the
professional development and report that the equity and inclusive
strategies they learned helped them provide an introductory
experience that resulted in a high level of engagement
and success.
The Exploring Computer Science class at Cornerstone is
required for all students. Even though some students struggled
or took some time to get engaged, Luis reports that they had to
keep trying, and were incentivized to complete assignments in
order to earn credit and fulﬁll the requirement. Because there is
buy-in about “Computer Science for All” from administration
and teachers, both Exploring Computer Science teachers at
Cornerstone could focus on using inclusive pedagogy strategies
to support their students and shift the normative beliefs of who
can do computer science. In this case, teacher agency is best
contextualized as in Biesta and Tedder (2007), an alignment
between teachers’ intentions/actions, school environment, and
administration. The momentum at the school is strong enough
that Luis’s colleague has started looking into adding Advanced
Placement Computer Science Principles course as the follow-up
course to Exploring Computer Science.
DISCUSSION
These case studies elucidate the key problems of practice and
opportunities for critical hope that teachers hold as they teach
“Computer Science for All.” Though their contexts vary in terms
of geography, identity, and student demographics, these teachers
collectively shed light on the lived practices of democratizing
computer science education. With the curricular, pedagogical,
and policy support of the “Computer Science for Oregon”
initiative, the teacher professional learning results, alongside the
TABLE 2 | Developing equity-focused practices for computer science school
reform.
Dimensions of
school reform
for equity
Supportive policies and practices that supports equity
and teacher agency in statewide computer science
Technical
• Adoption
of
introductory
computer
science
course
incorporated into school schedule
• A common curriculum supports teacher collaboration and
can assess inclusive student learning
• Culturally responsive curricular material supports student
learning, especially for historically underrepresented groups
• Course coded to be available to students across
academic “tracks”
Pedagogical
• Professional development that supports inquiry- and
equity-oriented instruction
• Collaboration with other teachers teaching the same course
at the same school
• Collaboration with other teachers outside of school,
including other “Computer Science for All” teachers,
educators part of Computer Science Teachers Association
state network
Political
• Computer science courses counts toward a graduation
requirement
• Teacher support for offering introductory and inclusive
computer science courses
• School-level counselor and teacher faculty support from
other disciplines/programs
• Top-down
support
from
school
leadership,
including
principals
• Top-down support from school district leadership,
including superintendents and school boards
Normative
• Educator beliefs about suitability of computer science
course for all students
• Opportunity to study computer science designed to be
available and equitable for all students as part of general
education track
• Sufﬁcient number of teachers assigned by school to
support computer science courses for all students at
high school
case studies, detail the multiple factors that must be considered
and attended to in eﬀorts to democratize computer science.
Drawing from these ﬁndings and connecting the narratives
of teachers with the theoretical framework on equity-oriented
school reform, we have compiled the following set of practices
that support a social justice approach to broadening participation
in secondary computer science (Table 2). To supplement and
apply a racially- and gender-conscious approach to broadening
participation in computing, we categorize these ﬁndings in
terms of the technical, normative, political, and pedagogical
dimensions that have been found to support computer science
for all students.
The descriptions of teacher agency, in terms of possibilities
and constraints, also indicate that policy and teacher education
eﬀorts, when connected in meaningful ways, can help sustain
the availability of computer science courses and necessary
educational resources. With an equity-focused professional
development program, we witnessed how teachers can enact
agency within their particular educational environment to
inﬂuence regional and statewide reform eﬀorts to broaden
Frontiers in Education | www.frontiersin.org
10
January 2020 | Volume 4 | Article 162
Goode et al.
Computer Science for Equity
participation in computing education. The results from this study
also highlight that equity must remain at the core of state-wide
reform eﬀort, or else eﬀorts will likely raise opportunities for the
same overrepresented groups.
The interplay between structures and individual beliefs also
suggest that to ensure that computer science education will
take hold, and be sustainable, for all students, schools must
simultaneously attend to the technical, pedagogical, political,
and normative dimensions of “Computer Science for All”
eﬀorts. While professional development sessions and statewide
initiatives can support the introduction of inclusive and
evidence-based curriculum and support professional learning for
teachers, attending to the political climate and normative notions
of who belongs in computer science is a key strategy for nurturing
school-level buy-in for computer science being placed in the
core curriculum. These ﬁndings underscore that before scaling
statewide reform eﬀorts in computing, we must attend to the
policies, practices, and belief systems in schools to ensure reform
eﬀorts do not just increase the numbers of students enrolling
in computing classes, but actually broaden the engagement and
participation rates of historically minoritized students.
Finally, we cannot overstate the importance of teachers as
social change agents in expanding normative notions about
who belongs in computer science classes in twenty-ﬁrst century
high schools. Overwhelmingly, the case studies showcase the
tremendous advocacy eﬀorts of computer science teachers in
serving as change agents diversifying and democratizing Oregon
high school computer science education. The teachers in this
study exempliﬁed how broadening participation in computing
requires a committed network of educators who enact social
justice principles both within their schools and classrooms, and
as part of the large computer science teacher community.
CONCLUSION
The research presented in this paper documents how a
statewide initiative aiming to provide more equitable access
and participation in high school computer science courses
supported teacher learning and was generative for school-level
reform. Though the professional learning for teachers showed
a positive impact in preparing teachers to teach computer
science and address local policy with equity principles, we
discovered key barriers and opportunities at school, district,
regional, and state levels impeded and propelled initial eﬀorts
for enacting teacher agency at reaching “Computer Science for
All” in schools. Still, incremental progress has increased learning
opportunities for hundreds of Oregon students. The knowledge
gained from this study of state computer science implementation
can inform the eﬀorts of other states seeking to identify whole-
school support strategies to broaden participation in high
school computing.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets generated for this study will not be made publicly
available due to conﬁdentiality concerns for participants.
ETHICS STATEMENT
This study involved human participants was reviewed and
approved by the University of Oregon Research Compliance
Services. The participants provided informed consent to
participate in this study.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JG and MS led eﬀorts in data collection and analysis. JHu and
JHo contributed to the program design and implementation. All
authors were involved in the writing of this paper.
FUNDING
This material was based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. CNS-1738883. Any
opinions,
ﬁndings,
and
conclusions
or
recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation.
