The Inclusive Professional Framework
for Societies: Changing Mental Models
to Promote Diverse, Equitable, and
Inclusive STEM Systems Change
Gretalyn M. Leibnitz 1,2*, Donald L. Gillian-Daniel 1,3,4, Robin M c C. Greenler 3,4,
Rebecca Campbell-Montalvo 1,5,6, Heather Metcalf 1,6, Verónica A. Segarra 1,7,
Jan W. Peters 1,8, Shannon Patton 3,4, Andrea Lucy-Putwen 1,6 and Ershela L. Sims 1,6
1Amplifying the Alliance to Catalyze Change for Equity in STEM Success (ACCESS+), Washington, DC, United States, 2ProActualize
Consulting, LLC, Moscow, ID, United States, 3University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States, 4INCLUDES Aspire
Alliance, Madison, WI, United States, 5University of Connecticut, Mansﬁeld, CT, United States, 6Women in Engineering, ProActive
Network, Washington, DC, United States, 7High Point University, High Point, NC, United States, 8Katalytik, Christchurch,
United Kingdom
Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) professional societies (ProSs)
are uniquely positioned to foster national-level diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) reform.
ProSs serve broad memberships, deﬁne disciplinary norms and culture, and inform
accrediting bodies and thus provide critical levers for systems change. STEM ProSs
could be instrumental in achieving the DEI system reform necessary to optimize
engagement of all STEM talent, leveraging disciplinary excellence resulting from diverse
teams. Inclusive STEM system reform requires that underlying “mental models” be
examined. The Inclusive Professional Framework for Societies (IPF: Societies) is an
interrelated set of strategies that can help ProSs change leaders (i.e., “boundary
spanners”) and organizations identify and address mental models hindering DEI
reform. The IPF: Societies uses four “I’s”—Identity awareness and Intercultural
mindfulness (i.e., equity mindset) upon which inclusive relationships and Inﬂuential DEI
actions are scaffolded. We discuss how the IPF: Societies complements existing DEI tools
(e.g., Women in Engineering ProActive Network’s Framework for Promoting Gender Equity
within Organization; Amplifying the Alliance to Catalyze Change for Equity in STEM
Success’ Equity Environmental Scan Tool). We explain how the IPF: Societies can be
applied to existing ProS policy and practice associated with common ProS functions (e.g.,
leadership, membership, conferences, awards, and professional development). The next
steps are to pilot the IPF: Societies with a cohort of STEM ProSs. Ultimately, the IPF:
Societies has potential to promote more efﬁcient, effective, and lasting DEI organizational
transformation and contribute to inclusive STEM disciplinary excellence.
Keywords: inclusive professional framework for societies, mental models, intercultural mindfulness, equity mindset,
inclusive relationships, identity awareness, inﬂuential actions, DEI (or Diversity Equity and Inclusion)
*Correspondence:
Gretalyn M. Leibnitz
Leibnitz.ACCESSplus@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Gender, Sex and Sexualities,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Sociology
Received: 27 September 2021
Accepted: 14 December 2021
Published: 18 February 2022
Citation:
Leibnitz GM, Gillian-Daniel DL,
Greenler RMcC,
Campbell-Montalvo R, Metcalf H,
Segarra VA, Peters JW, Patton S,
Lucy-Putwen A and Sims EL (2022)
The Inclusive Professional Framework
for Societies: Changing Mental Models
to Promote Diverse, Equitable, and
Inclusive STEM Systems Change.
Front. Sociol. 6:784399.
doi: 10.3389/fsoc.2021.784399
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 6 | Article 784399
1
PERSPECTIVE
published: 18 February 2022
doi: 10.3389/fsoc.2021.784399
INCLUSIVE STEM DISCIPLINARY
EXCELLENCE REQUIRES SYSTEMS
REFORM
Addressing complex global challenges, such as climate change and
health disparities, requires optimal engagement of people trained
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
Because diverse teams embody enhanced capacity for problem
solving, innovation, and resilience, they advance disciplinary
excellence in a way that homogenous groups cannot (e.g., Page,
2007;
Borman
et
al.,
2010;
Page,
2017;
McGee,
2020).
Consequently, not only are more STEM-trained people needed,
but speciﬁcally more diverse STEM-trained people are needed.
Unfortunately, STEM cultures often discourage diversity by
reproducing exclusionary norms and values (Tonso, 1996, 1999,
2007; Seymour and Hewitt, 1997; Pawley and Tonso, 2011;
BaillieKabo and Reader, 2012; Riley et al., 2014; Cech and Rothwell,
2018; Hughes, 2018; McGee, 2020). Current US STEM systems
privilege white, and/or men in STEM, and are typically perceived as
unwelcoming by marginalized groups, especially women from various
backgrounds (Metcalf et al., 2018; McGee, 2020; Campbell-Montalvo et
al., 2021a). Expression of majority priority is manifest in complex ways,
such as equating masculinity with technical ability, embracing and
centering whiteness (Hacker, 1981, 1989; Eisenhart and Finkel, 1998;
Lohan and Faulkner, 2004; Faulkner, 2007; Foor et al., 2007; Tonso,
2007; Pawley and Tonso, 2011; BaillieKabo and Reader, 2012), and
fostering the false idea that STEM is an apolitical, value-free, empirical
meritocracy (McGee, 2020; Metcalf, 2017). Systems of power, privilege,
and oppression intersect with those shaped by gender, race, ethnicity,
sexuality, disability, nationality, class, and more (Crenshaw, 1989;
Crenshaw 1991; Grifﬁn and Museus, 2011; Collins, 2015; Metcalf,
2016; Warner et al., 2016; Metcalf et al., 2018). Collectively, these
intersecting systems inﬂuence opportunities, create barriers, and can in
turn promote exclusionary experiences for a variety of individuals,
including women and other groups underrepresented in STEM. These
experiences of exclusionary STEM systems are often replicated in, and
sustained, not just in established STEM work environments but also by
a STEM education system that socializes the next generation of the
STEM workforce to abide by and reproduce these norms and values
(Trouillot, 1995; Foucault, 2007; Tonso, 2007; Tonso, 2014).
While STEM systems reform is clearly needed to attract, retain, and
support a thriving diverse STEM talent pool, there is widespread
expectation that minoritized and marginalized people will, and should
be, the ones tasked with changing a system by which they are
oppressed and largely excluded (Forrester, 2020). Majoritized
people receive disproportionate power within the current system,
so it is incumbent on them to be leaders in STEM system change to
promote inclusive disciplinary excellence. This change must be
supported through both “intentional introspection and subsequent
action” (Chaudhary and Berhe, 2020, pg. 3).
UNCOVERING PROFESSIONAL SOCIETY
MENTAL MODELS
Mental models are “deeply held beliefs and assumptions, and
taken-for-granted ways of operating that inﬂuence how we think,
what we do, and how we talk” (Kania et al., 2018, p. 4). We argue
that intentional introspection of mental models can foster
systems change. Systems change is “shifting the conditions
that are holding the problem in place” (Kania et al., 2018).
Kania et al. (2018) identiﬁed six conditions of systems change
that are explicit (i.e., policies, practices, resource ﬂows), semi-
explicit (i.e., relationships and connections, power dynamics), and
implicit (i.e., mental models). Mental models hold the other
conditions in place. Unless we learn to work at the mental
models level, other structural changes “...will, at best, be
temporary or incomplete” (Kania et al., 2018, p.8). While
work
addressing
mental
models
has
been
increasing
in
academic institutions (e.g., NSF ADVANCE-funded initiatives)
and industry settings, few projects have undertaken these efforts
within professional societies (ProSs).
Given the multiple, varied disciplinary functions performed by
STEM ProSs, and that STEM ProSs often engage other STEM
system gatekeepers (e.g., corporate, laboratory, and academic
organizations), STEM ProSs are uniquely positioned as critical
levers for STEM systems change (e.g., National Academy of
Sciences et al., 2005). Peters and others (in press) identify 11
functions performed by STEM ProSs (i.e., governance and
leadership;
membership;
programming;
professionalization;
student chapters; prizes, awards, and funding; outreach and
engagement; employment; advocacy; and publishing). Through
functions such as these, the ProS reinforces mental models
regarding how the discipline “looks, feels, and acts.” Leaders
are identiﬁed, innovations celebrated, and the next generation is
nurtured. For example, students enter STEM degree programs
with varying levels of social capital (Skvoretz et al., 2020), and
ProSs keep them in their programs (Smith et al., 2021; Campbell-
Montalvo et al., in press). Some STEM ProSs are actively engaged
in STEM systems change to promote diversity, equity, and
inclusion (DEI) through STEM ProS functions (e.g., Segarra
et al., 2020a; Segarra et al., 2020b; Campbell-Montalvo et al.,
in press, Campbell-Montalvo et al., 2020; Etson et al., 2021).
However, we believe that to foster greater engagement by STEM
ProSs, more STEM ProS-speciﬁc tools are needed, especially
those that can help make explicit and reframe mental models
underpinning STEM ProS functions.
THE IPF: SOCIETIES AS A TOOL FOR
MENTAL MODEL CHANGES
We offer the Inclusive Professional Framework for Disciplinary
and Professional Societies (IPF: Societies) as an approach to help
elucidate and adjust mental models that underlie STEM ProS
functions (INCLUDES Aspire Alliance National Change, n.d.).
The IPF: Societies is a framework that can be used to explore how
internal conditions support and hinder current ProS DEI
aspirations and help set a foundation for lasting organizational
change. Speciﬁcally, the IPF: Societies is a research-informed
approach that focuses on awareness and skill development to
build an equity mindset—an orientation in which actions are
grounded in understanding of how social positionings affect
access to resources. This mindset creates greater capacity for
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 6 | Article 784399
2
Leibnitz et al.
Inclusive Professional Framework for Societies
inclusive relationships and supporting actions that are focused on
DEI change. The IPF: Societies includes the four “I’s”:
1. Identity awareness,
2. Intercultural mindfulness,
3. Inclusive relationships, and
4. Inﬂuential DEI actions.
The IPF: Societies derives from the Inclusive Professional
Framework for Faculty (IPF: Faculty). The IPF: Faculty was
developed by the Aspire Alliance’s National Change Initiative,
which is part of the National Science Foundation’s Inclusion
across
the
Nation
of
Communities
of
Learners
of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science
(NSF INCLUDES). The IPF: Societies was developed with
input
from
leaders
from
the
NSF
ADVANCE-funded
Amplifying the Alliance to Catalyze Change for Equity in
STEM Success (ACCESS+), (n.d) Initiative, whose mission is
to “accelerate the awareness, adoption, and adaptation of NSF
ADVANCE
evidence
based,
gender-related,
DEI
policies,
practices, and programs within and across STEM ProSs, by
providing
support
to
STEM
ProS
boundary
spanners.”
Through partnership with ACCESS+ the IPF: Societies graphic
was created, along with example functions (see Figure 1); and the
model was tailored to a ProS audience, reﬁned, and piloted.
Ongoing work through ACCESS+ will support engagement
and continued reﬁnement through use with future cohorts of
ACCESS+ ProSs and the development of complementary
resources.
Given the parallel role that mental models play in university
and ProS systems, we propose that it is valuable to adapt the IPF
for use in ProSs. Like the IPF: Faculty, the IPF: Societies at its core
focuses on building an equity mindset through identity awareness
and intercultural mindfulness and then puts that mindset into
practice
through
reinforcing
skills
that
support
inclusive
relationships. Where the frameworks (i.e., IPF: Faculty and
IPF: Societies) differ is in the contexts and roles of those
applying the framework. The IPF: Faculty was developed to
promote inclusive skill development for faculty across their
roles within academic institutions (e.g., teaching, advising,
research
mentoring,
collegiality,
and
leadership)
(Gillian-
Daniel et al., 2021b; Dukes et al., in press). For the IPF:
Societies, application occurs, initially by society DEI change
leaders (i.e., “boundary spanners”), in the various functions
that the society performs for its members and discipline, as
discussed in greater detail below (see Figure 1: IPF: Societies
with example ProS functions).
The IPF: Societies has dual target audience foci: 1) DEI
change leaders (individual focus) and 2) the ProSs as a
system (organizational focus). Key individuals within the
organizational system are ProS DEI change leaders, known as
“boundary spanners,” who are people within an organization
who work to connect ideas, resources, and stakeholders (Hill,
2020). These individuals engage in ﬁve key behaviors: 1)
ﬁnding—identifying knowledge and resources outside one’s
organization
to
advance
innovation,
research,
and
development (Ancana and Caldwell, 1992; Tushman and
Scanlan, 1981); 2) translating—making sense of what is
found for modiﬁcation and application within one’s own
organization
(Katz
and
Tushman,
1981);
3)
diffusing—sharing what is gained from extra-institutional
connections with fellow organizational members (Rogers,
2003); 4) gaining support—laying the political foundation
and support within an organization to implement innovation
(Brion et al., 2012; Faraj and Yan, 2009); and 5) social “weaving”
behaviors by being the bridge wherewith to connect diverse
stakeholders from multiple organizations under a common
purpose (Burt, 1992; Kania and Kramer, 2011). Boundary
spanners are an ideal lever for enacting and promoting DEI
change given that they are often in positions to reach other
boundary spanners in their ProSs and beyond (Aldrich and
Herker, 1977; Katz and Tushman, 1981; Ancona and Caldwell,
1992; Hill, 2020). We propose that uptake of the IPF: Societies by
boundary spanners to develop and reﬁne DEI awareness,
knowledge, and skills can better position these change leaders
to make systemic changes within their ProS. This in turn has
potential ripple effects extending to the wider STEM system
(Leibnitz et al., 2021). Similarly, by STEM ProSs using the IPF:
Societies to explore the ProS organizational system, both
internal-focus (i.e., the STEM ProS business infrastructure)
and external-focus (i.e., member and disciplinary serving
STEM ProS infrastructure) DEI awareness and organizational
capacity are enhanced, better positioning ProSs to enact DEI
systems change.
Figure 1 depicts the progression of the IPF: Societies’
processes, showing how the equity mindset is developed and
expands into relationships and actions that guide ProS core
functioning,
catalyzing
STEM
DEI
systems
change.
We
propose that the IPF: Societies can be usefully applied at both
FIGURE 1 | The IPF: Societies graphic with ﬁve example professional
society functions (INCLUDES Aspire Alliance National Change, n.d.).
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 6 | Article 784399
3
Leibnitz et al.
Inclusive Professional Framework for Societies
TABLE 1 | How the IPF: Societies informs practices within ﬁve example professional society functions.
Example ProS function
name and deﬁnition
(Peters et al., 2021)
Example
ProS policies/practices
Example ProS questions generated
with an IPF: Societies lens
Example ideas for implementing
more equitable practices
Governance and leadership—How the ProS
is run and major decisions are made (internal
focus)
Governing board members are
selected based on seniority within the
discipline
• How is seniority a result of structural
inequality within the ProS and U.S.
broader society?
• Develop a mission/vision statement or
other commitment to equality and
diversity that includes a non-
discrimination clause regarding
leadership and members (e.g., Potvit
et al., 2018)
• How does using seniority as a
measure of qualiﬁcation shape the
pool of possible governing board
members?
• Identify clear goals and adequate
resources to support change
• Gather inclusive organizational data;
analyze the data intersectionally; share
results publicly; and use the data to
inform action planning
• Ensure that DEI commitment is
reﬂected consistently in charges to all
committees
• Build a case for more diverse senior
leadership as essential to the long-
term success of the organization
• Build understanding, buy-in, and
support from grassroots organizational
members as well as from leadership
• Engage male and/or majority member
allies and advocates at all levels of the
organization in the culture-change
effort (e.g., Bilimoria et al., 2008)
Membership—ProS members and the
structures that shape membership makeup
(external focus)
In order to reduce survey burden and
avoid being too intrusive, the ProS
collects limited demographic data
through its membership application
• What data are collected, and for what
purpose(s)
• Maintain accountability by collecting data
on society membership and leadership
and present these numbers publicly
• How are the data collected currently
used to further an inclusive mission of
the society?
• Develop a mission/vision statement or
other commitment to equality and
diversity that includes a non-
discrimination clause regarding
leadership and members (e.g., Potvit
et al., 2018)
• Do members feel that the measures
accurately capture their social and
cultural identities?
• Frame diversity as a positive and enact
anti-discriminatory policies (e.g.,
societal codes of conduct)
• How is the rationale for collecting
demographic data articulated to
members as being both valuable and
aligned with ProS DEI priorities and
efforts?
• Work to address systemic bias to
create a culture of belonging and an
environment that recognizes and
supports the experiences of members
with marginalized identities (e.g.,
Abernethy et al., 2020)
Convenings—Who, where, and how people
participate in ProS events (external focus)
Conference committees are
composed of volunteers who
determine the speakers, program,
content, and social activities
• How do social and cultural identities
of the committee members affect
decisions about speakers, program
content, or social activities?
• Switch to fully virtual conferences with
multi-location in-person “local”
conferences (e.g., Sarabipour et al.,
2021)
• How does the ProS create buy-in
from membership around DEI-
focused programming?
• Select meeting locations that will be
safe for all members
• Choose environmentally responsible
accommodation near public
transportation
• How does the selection of the event’s
location reﬂect dominant views about
what feels comfortable, safe, or
enjoyable (e.g., restaurants,
entertainment, amenities)?
• Choose sustainable food catering
• Provide free and on-site nursing and
childcare facilities at regional meetings;
include this information in registration
materials
• Generate meeting codes of conduct
and ethics (e.g., Sarabipour et al., 2020)
(Continued on following page)
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 6 | Article 784399
4
Leibnitz et al.
Inclusive Professional Framework for Societies
individual and organizational levels. Below we describe speciﬁc
aspects of the IPF: Societies as well as its application.
Identity awareness is an awareness of aspects of one’s own
social and cultural identities and how those identities are
situated
within
larger
intersecting
systems
of
power.
Intercultural mindfulness is the “ability to understand
cultural differences in ways that enable one to interact
effectively with others from different racial, ethnic, or
social identity groups in both domestic and international
contexts” (Gillian-Daniel et al., 2021a). Collectively, “these
domains encompass many features of intercultural humility,
including: 1) awareness of one’s own cultural backgrounds,
including intersecting social identities; 2) recognizing one’s
biases and privileges in relation to self and others; 3)
committing to learning about others’ cultural backgrounds;
and 4) addressing disparities in relational power by, in part,
learning to recognize power differentials” (Gillian-Daniel
et al., 2021a). The more aware one is of aspects of one’s
own social and cultural identities, the identities of others, and
how those identities are situated within larger, intersecting
systems of power, the more equitably mindful one can be of
impacts, decisions, and programming driven by those
identities.
Equity
mindedness
underpins
building
inclusive
relationships. At both personal and organizational levels,
willingness,
capacity,
and
the
communication
skills
to
effectively engage those whose lived experiences may not
match one’s own is vital for examining mental models and
advancing inclusive ProS DEI reform. At the boundary
spanner level, inclusive relationships mean reﬂecting on
whose voices are, and are not, centered and carry decision-
making power when discussing important ProS policies,
processes, and activities. From the STEM ProS perspective,
building
inclusive
relationships
could
be
reﬂected
in
collaborations with a range of organizations with intention
to build mutual capacity. Inclusive relationships at the society
level help shift social narratives and can inform sense making
around information collected about the ProS, two examples of
how mental models have critical impact on organizational
systems (Kania et al., 2018).
Inﬂuential actions are how boundary spanners and ProSs drive
STEM system change. We propose that informed and diversely
networked people serving as DEI boundary spanners will be
motivated and held accountable for positive DEI change.
Boundary spanners’ actions can be focused on core ProS
functions. Peters and others (2021) identiﬁed 11 functions of
STEM ProSs for action focus. For explanatory purposes, we focus
on a subset of ﬁve ProS functions identiﬁed by Peter et al. (2021)
as depicted in the outer circles of Figure 1 and highlighted in
Table 1. Ultimately, we propose that IPF: Societies-informed
boundary spanners will engage in the inﬂuential actions
associated with establishing new mental models and create
accountability for nurturing the new diverse, equitable, and
inclusive ProS look, feel, and actions.
TABLE 1 | (Continued) How the IPF: Societies informs practices within ﬁve example professional society functions.
Example ProS function
name and deﬁnition
(Peters et al., 2021)
Example
ProS policies/practices
Example ProS questions generated
with an IPF: Societies lens
Example ideas for implementing
more equitable practices
Recognition—The established procedures
in which people apply or are nominated for
recognition or support (internal and external
foci)
Institutional afﬁliation is required on
membership applications, award
nominations, and presentation
proposals
• How is institutional afﬁliation tied to
structural inequality?
• Broaden what applicant qualiﬁcations
are considered when awards and
recognition are determined. For
example, for travel awards, consider
both evidence of a candidate’s
scientiﬁc achievement as well as their
expressed interest in attending/
beneﬁting from the event
• Is using institutional afﬁliation
necessary?
• Does institutional afﬁliation serve as a
proxy for exclusionary notions of
legitimacy, excellence, and thus bias
selection?
• How are scholars in career transition
and without institutional afﬁliation
provided access to ProS resources?
• Vette top nominees by cross-checking
code of conduct reports with other
societies and contacting Title IX ofﬁces
at current and previous institutions or
employers (e.g., Fernandes et al.,
2020)
• Evaluate the extent to which award
program goals and outcomes are
being met (e.g., Segarra et al., 2020a)
Professional development—Job boards,
mentoring, practitioner continuing
education, and similar efforts aimed at
cultivating members’ successful careers
(external focus)
Professional development offerings
provide suggestions to members
about how to be successful job
candidates
• What are the biases or assumptions
in career training that reinforce and
normalize whiteness and
masculinity?
• Provide professional development
programming to build core equity,
diversity, and inclusion competencies,
including and not limited to building
awareness around implicit bias (e.g.,
Coe et al., 2019)
• What systems can be introduced to
improve these society offerings?
• Include diversity-related programming
during annual meetings (e.g., offer
workshops on effective mentoring)
(e.g., Abernethy et al., 2020)
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 6 | Article 784399
5
Leibnitz et al.
Inclusive Professional Framework for Societies
DISCUSSION
The IPF: Societies complements the use of other DEI
organizational
tools
and
increases
both
individual
and
organizational capacity to more efﬁciently and effectively
identify and engage with DEI actions resulting from use of
these tools. For example, we offer the Women in Engineering
ProActive Network’s (WEPAN’s) Four Frames for Promoting
Gender
Equity
Within
Organizations
(WEPAN,
2013).
Originally adopted from Simmons University’s Center for
Gender in Organizations (1998), the four frames include: 1)
equipping the individual, 2) creating equal opportunity, 3)
valuing difference, and 4) revisioning culture. A STEM ProS
DEI boundary spanner employing the IPF: Societies can
evaluate
and
introduce
more
inclusive
professional
development programs (Frame 1); examine and recommend
DEI changes to organizational structures, policies, and
practices (Frame 2); call attention to ways in which ProS
leaders and the organization are not “walking the DEI
walk” (Frame 3); and identify and remedy incongruences
between ProS existing practices and goals outlined in the
ProS
strategic
plan
(Frame
4).
Similarly,
from
an
organizational perspective, WEPAN’s frames could be used
to evaluate the equity of professional development programs
and educational pathways (Frame 1); examine and revise
organizational structures, policies, and practices to support
greater DEI integration across all society functions (Frame 2);
ensure that all leaders are, and continue to be, trained and
coached on how to enact DEI-focused changes (Frame 3); and
create opportunities to re-vision ProS culture and reﬂect that
updated vision in the ProS mission and strategic plans
(Frame 4).
As
with
WEPAN’s
four
frames,
the
IPF:
Societies
complements
the
Equity
Environmental
Scanning
Tool
(EEST) (Peters et al., 2021). The EEST is a DEI self-
assessment tool for ProSs adapted by ACCESS+ from The
Royal Academy of Engineering and Science Council Diversity
and Inclusion Progression Framework (2021). We propose that
boundary spanners skilled in using the IPF: Societies will be
more efﬁciently and effectively able to enact changes in areas
identiﬁed by the EEST. Table 1 illustrates how the IPF: Societies
can inform ProS DEI practices in relation to a subset (i.e., 5 of
the original 11) of Peters et al. (2021) ProS’s core functions, each
of which have an internal focus (i.e., the STEM ProS business
infrastructure) and/or an external focus (i.e., member and
disciplinary serving STEM ProS infrastructure). We propose
that taking an IPF: Societies lens to the policies and practices
associated with each of these functions will help uncover and
offer an opportunity to change previously implicit ProS mental
models. We use questions to illustrate application of the IPF:
Societies. In each core ProS function (column 1), existing
policies
or
practices
are
presented
that
might
appear
reasonable to some (column 2), but when the IPF: Societies
lens is applied (column 3), systemic and structural inequities
affecting how the ProS engages with staff and members become
more visible. We offer example ideas of equitable practices that
could emerge from application of the IPF: Societies (column 4).
This
table
shows
how
the
ProS
may
not
be
making
programming decisions with an understanding of structural
issues (i.e., equity mindset), therefore missing out on the
TABLE 2 | Example IPF: Societies implementation strategies within professional societies.
Level of ProS
DEI engagement
(Peters,
et al., 2021)
Description of DEI
engagement level within
a society (Peters
et al., 2021)
Example IPF: Society-based
implementation strategies
No activity
No case for DEI has been developed yet
Society boundary spanners use the IPF: Societies to help identify a
network of others interested in DEI change and make the case for DEI
engagement to ProS leaders and members.
Idling
The DEI case is developing; however, DEI has not been prioritized; no
substantial planning or activity
Society boundary spanners engage in IPF: Societies-based programming
to build their equity mindset and interpersonal communication skills.
Emerging
There is a DEI case for action; initial DEI conversations, planning, and
action are underway, and activity is minimal/ad hoc
Society boundary spanners use the framework together with a DEI tool to
work with leadership and staff to identify areas of opportunity for growth in
the society. Their equity mindset supports them asking equity-based
questions about society functions. Society policies and procedures are
considered through this lens.
Progressing
The DEI case is well established; DEI actions have been carried out from
planning phases, and activity may not be routine yet
Society boundary spanners work with staff and key members to design
and implement DEI-based programming. Collaborations with other
organizations and initiatives allow the society to leverage existing
programming and resources as they infuse DEI throughout the society.
There is a “tipping point” of engagement by leadership, staff, and now
membership in these programs that support the “institutionalization” of
said efforts.
Achieving
The DEI case is being realized; planning and action have been underway
for several iterations, and impacts are clear
Society leadership and staff routinely collect and review data, for example,
on membership, about who engages in society leadership, on who speaks
at society functions, and who receives recognition from the society for their
scholarship. Policies and procedures are regularly reviewed and revised to
be more equitable and inclusive. The society uses a DEI tool to benchmark
their progress relative to peer societies and collaborates with these
societies to share best practices.
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2022 | Volume 6 | Article 784399
6
Leibnitz et al.
Inclusive Professional Framework for Societies
opportunity to address them and counter obstacles to DEI
through inclusive relationships and inﬂuential actions.
When and where the IPF: Societies is brought into the ProS
DEI change cycle will likely be dictated by the culture of the ProS
and/or ProS leaders. Examples for how the IPF: Societies can be
used and inform engagement is depicted in Table 2 below.
CONCLUSION
In sum, Identity awareness and Intercultural mindfulness create
an equity mindset that supports inclusive relationships and
inﬂuential actions. The four “I’s” core to the IPF: Societies
provide a framework for reﬂecting and acting on ProS culture
at individual (e.g., STEM ProS DEI boundary spanner) and
organizational levels. The IPF: Societies offers a way to guide
change of mental models. ProS DEI boundary spanners
employing the IPF: Societies can leverage their positionality
and ability to straddle groups to affect cultural change across
STEM ProSs, in combination with the efforts of other boundary
spanners and in the disciplines in which they engage.
Of critical importance when working with mental models in
ProSs is the expectation that there may be resistance to DEI
initiatives, especially among members with majoritized identities
who may be invested, even subconsciously, in maintaining
existing
power structures
(Lipsitz,
2006).
Because
people
occupy a constellation of identities of various positionings,
awareness of common discourses rejecting DEI could help in
ProSs navigating them (Bonilla-Silva, 2006). The IPF: Societies
offers a framework to begin difﬁcult discussions and offers a
structured approach for working toward change. Of course, to be
effective, the IPF: Societies requires sustained mobilization of its
pieces, vis-à-vis making DEI concerns part of the fabric of ProSs.
Potential outcomes of wide-scale implementation of the IPF:
Societies could be ProS actions in service of a more diverse,
inclusive, and equitable STEM culture writ large. Resultant
increased individual capacity to engage in the articulation and
reframing of legacy mental models in turn guides organizational
transformation and culture reform through broader systems
change. As organizations engage in systemic change, greater
ProS and STEM culture DEI changes can be made. Eventually,
DEI change becomes less about individual efforts for speciﬁc DEI
actions and more about broad, structurally patterned ProS
organizational transformation and, ultimately, STEM culture
reform.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included in
the article/Supplementary Material; further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
GML, DG-D, and RMcCG contributed to conception, design, and
ﬁnalization of the paper. RC-M and HM contributed to drafts of
the manuscript with special emphasis on social-science sections
of the manuscript. SP had special focus on the IPF: Societies ﬁgure
development. JWP and RC-M contributed to drafts of the
manuscript with special emphasis on the sections associated
with the ACCESS+ Equity Environmental Scanning Tool
(EEST). VAS, AL-P, and ELS provided IPF model and ﬁgure
reﬁnement. All authors contributed to manuscript revision, read,
and approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant Nos (2017953, 1834518,
1834522, 1834510, 1834513, 1834526, and 1834521). Any
opinions,
ﬁndings,
and
conclusions
or
recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation.
