22   International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction, 4(2), 22-34, April-June 2008
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global
is prohibited.
absTraCT
This article describes a unique, educational project within the field of ethics and computers that 
was implemented in the undergraduate study of computer science in 2002. Nesna University 
College has been using the example of sexual abuse of children in case study teaching in social 
informatics, in order to create an environment for intrinsically-motivated learning within the 
field of ethics in computer science. The project also gave the students a unique opportunity to 
get involved both emotionally and practically in the field of social informatics. The project is 
run in cooperation with Save the Children Norway and the Norwegian National Crime Squad. 
The computer science education at Nesna University College is the only computer science 
education in the world which has sexual abuse of children as the main topic on the computer 
science curriculum. The computer science students provide both the Save the Children Norway 
and the National Criminal Investigation Service with reports on various topics such as secure 
chat, camera phones and possible abuse, Freenet as a tool for sexual abuse, and so on. 
Keywords:  didactics; ethical/societal issues; pedagogy; social informatics
TermInology
The terms “Internet” and “digital media” 
as used in this article encompass the 
terms “World Wide Web” and “cyber-
space.” The communication that is of 
concern here is what is accessed via chat 
rooms. The term “children” or “young 
people” is applied to people under 16 
years of age. “Sexual abuse” is used in 
this article to describe both the activities 
by grown-ups to induce children in talk-
ing about sex with them in chat rooms, 
meet them for sex, and the distribution 
and use of child pornography. The term 
“child pornography” is defined as any 
visual depiction—including any photo-
getting Involved: 
Perspectives on the use of True Projects 
as Tools for developing ethical Thinking in 
Computer science students
Per Arne Godejord, Nesna University College, Norway
IGI PUBLISHING
This paper appears in the publication, International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction, Volume 4, Issue 2
edited by Bernd Carsten Stahl © 2008, IGI Global
701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Suite 200, Hershey PA 17033-1240, USA
Tel: 717/533-8845; Fax 717/533-8661; URL-http://www.igi-global.com
ITJ4110
International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction, 4(2), 22-34, April-June 2008   23
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global 
is prohibited.
graph, film, video, picture, or computer 
or computer-generated image or picture, 
whether made or produced by elec-
tronic, mechanical, or other means—of 
sexually explicit conduct where children 
are engaged, or made to look like they 
are engaged, in sexual activity. The 
term in Norway is often replaced with 
the term “abusive material,” so as to 
underline the fact that this material is 
not pornography as such. “Grooming” 
is a term describing the activity by a 
grown-up to gain the trust of a child 
with the intent of abusing him or her 
sexually. ICT stands for Information 
and Computer Technology.
InTroduCTIon
The last decade has seen a rapid de-
velopment and growth in the use of 
computer-based communication and 
information sharing. Internet—or “the 
Net” as it is sometimes called—has 
proven to be perhaps the most popu-
lar mass-communication medium in 
the world. As with the phone and the 
television, most of the society has read-
ily adopted the technology. Its spread 
internationally and its penetration into 
almost every corner of the educational 
system and family life, as well as work, 
is often described as a ”revolution.” 
As one of the first countries outside 
the United States to be connected to 
the ARPANET, Norway has quickly 
developed its use of Internet from a 
purely researchers’ tool to being second 
on the list of European countries where 
Internet is used daily by its population. 
Children and young people in particular 
have readily embraced the new com-
munication medium, and they utilize 
it in quite a number of ways. A wide 
array of digital tools is enabling kids to 
express themselves, to create their own 
identities, and to personalize the media 
they use. Their creativity seems limit-
less and includes such various forms 
as mp3 lists, online game characters, 
digital movies, and blogs. Just take a 
look at www.youtube.com and see how 
kids place themselves in full view of 
the whole world, or check Web sites 
like the Norwegian “www.deiligst.no” 
(Delicious.no), where teenage girls and 
boys ask to be evaluated by their peers 
on their looks and bodies. Also, blogging 
is all the rage, and writing innermost 
thoughts online instead of in the old 
diary book might seem quite fun.
The problem with blogging is that 
children reveal more online than par-
ents know, and they do it because they 
think that blogs are only read by their 
friends. No one ever told them that 
everything placed on the Net is visible 
for everyone. There are also similar 
problems with YouTube and sites like 
“Deiligst.no.”
Since the fall of 2002, the depart-
ment of computer science at Nesna 
University College has been working 
with a project called “Getting Involved.” 
The project was a part of the undergradu-
ate program in computer science and 
the course in social informatics. The 
project focused on child pornography 
and the Internet. In March 2003, Nesna 
University College signed an agreement 
with the Norwegian Save the Children 
 
11 more pages are available in the full version of this document,
which may be purchased using the "Add to Cart" button on the
product's webpage:
www.igi-global.com/article/getting-involved-perspectives-use-
true/2922?camid=4v1
Related Content
Semantic Tagging of Events in Video Using HNN
Parul Saxena and R. S. Jadon (2022). Machine Learning for Societal Improvement,
Modernization, and Progress (pp. 135-157).
www.igi-global.com/chapter/semantic-tagging-of-events-in-video-using-
hnn/309759?camid=4v1a
Toward an Enacted Approach to Understanding OSS Developer’s Motivations
Régis Meissonierm, Isabelle Bourdon, Serge Amabile and Stéphane Boudrandi (2012).
International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction (pp. 38-54).
www.igi-global.com/article/toward-enacted-approach-understanding-
oss/62661?camid=4v1a
A Comparative Case Study of Indonesian and UK Organisational Culture
Differences in IS Project Management
Andrew McDonald and Sven Helmer (2011). International Journal of Technology and
Human Interaction (pp. 28-37).
www.igi-global.com/article/comparative-case-study-indonesian-
organisational/53201?camid=4v1a
Exploring the Preferences for Anticipated Use of Head-Mounted Displays
Niek Zuidhof and Somaya Ben Allouch (2019). International Journal of Mobile Human
Computer Interaction (pp. 40-48).
www.igi-global.com/article/exploring-the-preferences-for-anticipated-use-of-
head-mounted-displays/237173?camid=4v1a
