Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research (J-PEER) 
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research (J-PEER) 
Volume 12
Issue 2 
Article 11 
2022 
The Intersection of Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and 
The Intersection of Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and 
Engineering Design in Secondary STEM 
Engineering Design in Secondary STEM 
Mariam Manuel 
University of Houston, mamanuel@central.uh.edu 
Jessica Gottlieb 
Texas Tech University, jessica.gottlieb@ttu.edu 
Gina Svarovsky 
University of Notre Dame, gsvarovsky@nd.edu 
See next page for additional authors 
Follow this and additional works at: https://docs.lib.purdue.edu/jpeer 
 Part of the Curriculum and Instruction Commons, Engineering Education Commons, Other Teacher 
Education and Professional Development Commons, Science and Mathematics Education Commons, 
Secondary Education Commons, and the Secondary Education and Teaching Commons 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Manuel, M., Gottlieb, J., Svarovsky, G., & Hite, R. (2023). The Intersection of Culturally Responsive 
Pedagogy and Engineering Design in Secondary STEM. Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education 
Research (J-PEER), 12(2), Article 11. 
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380 
This document has been made available through Purdue e-Pubs, a service of the Purdue University Libraries. 
Please contact epubs@purdue.edu for additional information. 
This is an Open Access journal. This means that it uses a funding model that does not charge readers or their 
institutions for access. Readers may freely read, download, copy, distribute, print, search, or link to the full texts of 
articles. This journal is covered under the CC BY-NC-ND license. 
The Intersection of Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and Engineering Design in 
The Intersection of Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and Engineering Design in 
Secondary STEM 
Secondary STEM 
Abstract 
Abstract 
The instructional practices of the engineering design process and culturally responsive pedagogy have 
each garnered national attention and multiple decades of research. Findings from the respective literature 
bases call for educators and policymakers to integrate these two pedagogical approaches into K-12 
classroom instruction. Scholars have argued that this integration would improve student engagement and 
academic achievement. There is a significant amount of research that supports the positive student 
outcomes associated with each approach, yet there remains a dearth of literature that addresses the 
integration of these two practices into the science and mathematics content areas. The movement 
around educational reform is rooted in teachers serving as learners; however, understanding how 
teachers learn and respond to reform is largely overlooked. The present research sought to examine the 
way in which teachers perceive and define integrated pedagogical approaches upon implementation. The 
authors utilized a comparative case study design to represent experiences of five secondary math and 
science teachers enrolled in graduate-level coursework and professional development on culturally 
responsive pedagogy and the engineering design process. Findings suggest that teachers’ self-reported 
pedagogical beliefs acted synergistically between the two pedagogical approaches. Subsequently, 
participating teachers expressed a strong preference towards the enactment of an integrated pedagogy 
of a culturally responsive engineering design process. The present research offers valuable 
recommendations for teacher educators, professional development providers, policymakers, and 
researchers who wish to integrate culturally responsive pedagogy and the engineering design process in 
math or science K-12 classrooms. The significance of this research underscores the importance of 
empowering teachers with professional development, around implementation of novel pedagogical 
approaches, to both shape and inform their beliefs and practices. 
Keywords 
Keywords 
engineering design, culturally responsive pedagogy, STEM teachers, case study 
Document Type 
Document Type 
Invited Contributions: Best Papers from ASEE Pre-College Engineering Education 
Cover Page Footnote 
Cover Page Footnote 
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Division of 
Undergraduate Education 1759454. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations 
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
National Science Foundation. This paper is part of a set of papers recognized by the American Society for 
Engineering Education (ASEE)’s Pre-College Engineering Education Division as one of the division’s best 
papers from the 2022 conference. J-PEER republishes the ASEE Pre-College Engineering Education 
Division’s best papers with permission from ASEE and under the ‘‘Invited Contributions: Best Papers from 
ASEE Pre-College Engineering Education’’ section of the journal. J-PEER acknowledges that ASEE holds 
the copyright for this paper, the original version of which can be accessed at: Manuel, M. (2022, August). 
The intersection of culturally responsive pedagogy and engineering design in secondary STEM (Research 
to Practice). Paper presented at 2022 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, Minneapolis, MN. 
https://peer.asee.org/41186 
Authors 
Authors 
Mariam Manuel, Jessica Gottlieb, Gina Svarovsky, and Rebecca Hite 
This invited contributions: best papers from asee pre-college engineering education is available in Journal of Pre-
College Engineering Education Research (J-PEER): https://docs.lib.purdue.edu/jpeer/vol12/iss2/11 
Available online at http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/jpeer
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research 12:2 (2022) 207–224
The Intersection of Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and Engineering
Design in Secondary STEM
Mariam Manuel1, Jessica Gottlieb2, Gina Svarovsky3, and Rebecca Hite2
1College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University of Houston
2College of Education, Texas Tech University
3Center for STEM Education, University of Notre Dame
Abstract
The instructional practices of the engineering design process and culturally responsive pedagogy have each garnered national attention
and multiple decades of research. Findings from the respective literature bases call for educators and policymakers to integrate these two
pedagogical approaches into K-12 classroom instruction. Scholars have argued that this integration would improve student engagement
and academic achievement. There is a significant amount of research that supports the positive student outcomes associated with each
approach, yet there remains a dearth of literature that addresses the integration of these two practices into the science and mathematics
content areas. The movement around educational reform is rooted in teachers serving as learners; however, understanding how teachers
learn and respond to reform is largely overlooked. The present research sought to examine the way in which teachers perceive and define
integrated pedagogical approaches upon implementation. The authors utilized a comparative case study design to represent experiences of
five secondary math and science teachers enrolled in graduate-level coursework and professional development on culturally responsive
pedagogy and the engineering design process. Findings suggest that teachers’ self-reported pedagogical beliefs acted synergistically
between the two pedagogical approaches. Subsequently, participating teachers expressed a strong preference towards the enactment of an
integrated pedagogy of a culturally responsive engineering design process. The present research offers valuable recommendations for
teacher educators, professional development providers, policymakers, and researchers who wish to integrate culturally responsive
pedagogy and the engineering design process in math or science K-12 classrooms. The significance of this research underscores the
importance of empowering teachers with professional development, around implementation of novel pedagogical approaches, to both
shape and inform their beliefs and practices.
Keywords:
engineering design, culturally responsive pedagogy, STEM teachers, case study
Introduction
The purpose of this comparative case study is to investigate teacher beliefs and sense of agency upon implementing new
instructional practices; specifically teaching secondary science or mathematics content infused with the engineering design
process (EDP) (Katehi et al., 2009) and culturally responsive pedagogy (CRP) (Ladson-Billings, 2009). Currently, K-12
schooling in the USA lacks exposure to the appreciation and knowledge surrounding the creativity, rewarding work, and
positive learning outcomes associated with science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)-related careers
(Katehi et al., 2009). This lack of exposure especially limits women and people of color, both of whom are underrepresented
in STEM fields (Katehi et al., 2009; National Science Board, 2016). As such, while the need for improving the success rates
1
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
in STEM coursework is pertinent across all racial and ethnic backgrounds, it is especially critical to address the needs of
students from historically minoritized populations that are disproportionately less likely to pursue and persist through
STEM-related degree programs (Leboy & Madden, 2012).
One strategy for reform in improving participation in STEM fields is aimed towards K-12 pedagogies in math and
science classrooms. Shifts in instructional practices are grounded within the beliefs or agentic behaviors of teachers as the
guiding force behind their instructional decisions and actions (Pajares, 1992; Rokeach, 1968; Siwatu, 2007). There is a
substantial amount of research on the topics of the EDP and culturally responsive teaching suggesting that the pedagogical
approaches result in positive student outcomes (Gay, 2000; Katehi et al., 2009; Ladson-Billings, 2009). However, the
response, beliefs, and understanding that teachers have about these pedagogies have been largely overlooked (De Florio,
2016). Accordingly, the crux of the present research is grounded in the value of examined secondary mathematics and
science teachers’ beliefs regarding the pedagogical approaches of EDP and CRP. Moreover, through the study of teachers’
agentic behaviors, the present research study provides insights into the barriers that teachers may encounter when
integrating EDP and CRP pedagogies.
This study was conducted through the lens of Bandura’s social cognitive theory and is driven by the assertion that
individuals are capable of influencing decisions, functions, and behavior with intentionality (Bandura, 1986, 2001, 2006),
known as agency. Humans’ beliefs are at the core of their agentic behaviors, which includes self-regulated behaviors that
allow an individual to take the necessary actions to yield desired outcomes (Bandura, 2006). These agentic behaviors
include intentionality and forethought to guide the plans for action, as well as self-reactiveness and self-reflection which
allow for one to persevere through challenges and self-examine their progress (Bandura, 2001). Acknowledging that an
individual’s sense of agency leads them to actively regulate their own experiences provides an ideal lens from which to
examine teacher agency and their pedagogical beliefs. The following research question was informed by the theoretical
underpinnings of Bandura’s (1986, 2001) social cognitive theory:
RQ 1. How, and in what ways, are secondary mathematics and science teachers’ pedagogical beliefs and sense of
agency related to the integration of the EDP and CRP in the classroom?
RQ 1a. What barriers do secondary mathematics and science teachers experience during implementation of CRP and
EDP?
RQ 1b. How do secondary mathematics and science teachers perceive their own role in the movement to implement CRP
and EDP in secondary science and mathematics curricula?
Literature Review
Both CRP and EDP have each garnered national attention and multiple decades worth of research (Gay, 2010; Katehi
et al., 2009; Ladson-Billings, 2009; Lee & Fradd, 1998; Wulf, 1998). The findings from these bodies of literature urge the
integration of these two pedagogies into K-12 instruction to support inclusive STEM curricula (Crismond, 2001; Kolodner
et al., 2003; Mehalik et al., 2008), greater student interest, and improved academic achievement (Aguirre & del Rosario
Zavala, 2013; Lachapelle & Cunningham, 2014).
The EDP is a critical component of the work engineers do and how they approach societal problems. EDP has been
defined as an approach encompassing identification of a problem and developing a model that is refined through data
analysis to produce a solution consisting of social and technological elements (Daugherty & Custer, 2012; Hynes et al.,
2011). According to Katehi et al. (2009), EDP is in essence, ‘‘the central activity of engineering’’ (p. 56). Wulf (1998)
explained that engineers regularly tackle problems through consideration of limitations and constraints (i.e., cost, time,
materials, etc.) to derive solutions that cater to human wants and needs. Hence, EDP identifies a problem and works towards
the design of a viable solution through an iterative set of practices (Apedoe et al., 2008). Although the order of these
practices may vary, the EDP encompasses a series of critical steps aimed at addressing a specific problem (Atman et al.,
1999). The process of engaging in the EDP is initiated by identification of a need or problem (Apedoe et al., 2008) often
expressed through concerns of customers or clients (Crismond et al., 2006). Following this step, engineers explore similar,
previously solved, problems, while being mindful of constraints and limitations. This research phase is critical because it
allows engineers to acquire a deep understanding of how the problem being tackled relates to those previously resolved. The
process of re-design and re-testing provides engineers with useful insights about the physical constraints and limitations of
the problem or product. Furthermore, the practice of evaluation, which can take place at any point in the design, allows
engineers to obtain feedback, as well as generate ideas for upcoming redesign procedures (Crismond et al., 2006).
208
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
2
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
Therefore, the redesign stage is instrumental to the process as it allows engineers to refine the prototype through informed
decisions based on data collected and feedback acquired during testing and evaluations (Apedoe et al., 2008).
Carr and Strobel (2011) advocated that the integration of the EDP connects mathematics and science content in
meaningful ways for K-12 learners, which may help explain that inclusion of EDP resulted in improved student
achievement and interest in STEM fields (Katehi et al., 2009). However, according to Lee and Strobel (2014), while
preservice teacher preparation and in-service teacher professional development on scientific inquiry gained traction in
STEM education reform, the EDP did not receive the same level of attention. The authors believed that this discrepancy was
a result of an already established foundation for the sciences in K-12 curricula. Thus, an increased emphasis must be placed on
teacher preparation and professional development programs (Brophy et al., 2008; Lee & Strobel, 2014; Roehrig et al., 2012).
An essential feature of the EDP is to identify a problem akin to real-world challenges (Apedoe et al., 2008; Crismond
et al., 2006; Hynes, 2010). Yet, there is a dearth of literature on the need for framing those problems through culturally
relevant real-world challenges. Ladson-Billings (1994, 1995) coined this term during her exploration of the instructional
practices used by teachers to effectively teach students of color in a way that builds on their lived experiences. Ladson-
Billings stated that CRP is a philosophy of teaching that asserts the need to use students’ cultural identities and experiences
as resources for classroom instruction. CRP is ‘‘a pedagogy that empowers students intellectually, socially, emotionally, and
politically by using cultural referents to impart knowledge, skills, and attitudes’’ (Ladson-Billings, 1994, p. 382). The
implications of tailoring instruction to reflect the culture of ethnically diverse students includes positive learning outcomes
of underrepresented minority populations (Hollins, 1996; Ladson-Billings, 1994, 1995). Cultural characteristics are
inclusive of students’ ethnic background and traditions. These traits include varying forms of learning styles, societal
contributions, communications, and gender role socialization, all of which are influenced by cultural factors (Gay, 2000).
Accordingly, teachers must move past the faulty ideology of a one-size-fits-all instructional approach and, instead, adopt a
methodology that envisions content through their students’ cultural lens (Aguirre & del Rosario Zavala, 2013; Gay, 2000,
2002, 2010). The embodiment of CRP demands that teachers share content knowledge in meaningful ways, while also
creating avenues for students to challenge the systemic issues in society.
The Ladson-Billings (1994, 1995) model for CRP is built upon three fundamental pillars: academic achievement, cultural
competence, and sociopolitical consciousness. The first tenet asks instructors to foster an environment that is inclusive of
the instructional practices intended to help students master the content. Teachers who were able to effectively teach students
of color upheld a sense of responsibility towards preparing students to be academically successful. Ladson-Billings (1994)
further explained that the embodiment of CRP ‘‘requires that teachers attend to students’ academic needs, not merely make
them feel good’’ (p. 160). In her later work, Ladson-Billings (2006) explained that academic achievement does not equate to
student achievement on high-stakes testing. Instead, she shared that her vision for the tenet entails learning that occurs
through interactions with skilled teachers. The second tenet of CRP tasks teachers to design learning experiences that
celebrate the social, cultural, and linguistic background of their students. In doing so, teachers reject deficit-thinking when
working with students of color and, instead, view the culture and lived experiences of students as assets to their learning.
Consequently, teachers who embrace cultural competence affirm and celebrate their students’ cultural identities. The third
tenet of CRP aims to develop the sociopolitical and critical consciousness of students. Teachers who integrate CRP in their
classrooms cultivate opportunities for students to engage in academic discourse and activities that challenge the power
dynamics within their communities. Hence, students are empowered to question the social inequities they may have
personally experienced or witnessed. This tenet also suggests that teachers develop their own sociopolitical consciousness.
However, scholars in the field of CRP have acknowledged that teachers often struggle with doing so; therefore, they only
implement the first two of the three total tenets (Gay & Howard, 2000).
In sum, there remains a gap in the research on teachers’ beliefs and agentic behaviors when integrating EDP and CRP in
the science and mathematics classroom. Thus, the findings from this study aim to spark future investigations and
discussions on the power of a culturally responsive engineering design approach to teaching along with the agency of
teachers who are employing these practices. As such, this work also contributes to the literature on teacher agency,
a developing and important field in the realm of teacher education research that is scarcely explored and reported (Biesta
et al., 2015; Cheng & Huang, 2018; Va¨ha¨santanen, 2015).
Methodology
Teachers for this study were recruited from a National Science Foundation (NSF)-funded, five-year fellowship program
at the University of Houston, Leadership through Equity and Advocacy Development (LEAD) Houston. A cohort of
15 teachers participated who were enrolled in a master’s degree in STEM education and had four subsequent years of
professional development. The five teachers selected from the cohort shared plans for incorporating CRP and EDP during
the upcoming school year. This research utilized a study design (Merriam, 1998) that employed mixed methods for the data
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
209
3
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
collection (Creswell, 2014). Each participant comprised an individually bounded case (Stake, 1995) and the data collected
from each case were triangulated and analyzed within and across each case. The data consisted of submitted reflective
journal entries regarding their perceptions and beliefs about the implementation process, philosophy of teaching statements,
and transcripts from individual interviews. Member checking through synthesis of analyzed findings (Stake, 1995) was
facilitated as an additional and final data source. Saldan˜a’s (2013) coding techniques were utilized to identify emerging
themes for individual teachers and again through a thematic analysis to identify meta-patterns across cases. The findings
from the qualitative data were combined with quantitative results derived from the Design, Engineering, and Technology
(DET) survey (Yas¸ar et al., 2006), and the Culturally Responsive Teaching Outcome Expectancy (CRTOE) survey (Siwatu,
2007). During cross-case analysis, descriptive statistics acquired from the quantitative instruments helped corroborate
teachers’ beliefs and agentic behaviors when integrating EDP and CRP in their content instruction. Table 1 provides an
overview of the data sources and analyses to redress the research inquiry. The data collected include quantitative surveys for
each approach: EDP and CRP.
Qualitative Data Collection
Each participant was asked to complete a 10- to 15-minute reflective journal prompt. Teachers were asked to spend an
estimated 100–150 minutes total to complete ten short-answer journal prompts. These entries were completed following the
implementation of the instructional module inclusive of CRP and the EDP. Reflective journals are utilized in research to
provide participants and researchers with an avenue for expressing thoughts and narrating experiences (Connelly &
Clandinin, 1990). In the context of teacher education, reflective journaling strengthens relationships between the instructor
and trainee (Bashan et al., 2017), and improves the learning process of teaching candidates (Moon, 2000). According to
Farabaugh (2007), reflective journaling promotes awareness of the process through recording thoughts and feelings
associated with each aspect of the learning process. Moreover, journaling allows the learner to connect theory with practice
(Dyment & O’Connell, 2011).
In addition to reflective journaling, the data collected were also triangulated with the findings attained through semi-
structured individual interviews. Each interview lasted approximately one hour and took place after the teachers completed
their reflective journal prompts and surveys. Semi-structured interviews help provide a naturalistic environment that enables
interviewees to openly discuss their thoughts and ideas (Krueger & Casey, 2000). Furthermore, unlike the generalizations
caused by only using surveys, interviews yield insights into human behavior and perceptions (Fern, 2001). Doing so
allowed the authors to strategically pose interview questions guided by the responses obtained through the other data
sources. The interview protocol refinement (IPR) framework (Castillo-Montoya, 2016) was utilized to strengthen the
reliability of the interview protocols as shown in Table 2.
The first step of the IPR for interview protocol development mapped the interview questions onto a matrix of the key
constructs of the framework. A few additional questions were added to obtain background information regarding the
participants’ school setting. The next phase of the framework suggests that the researcher construct an inquiry-driven
conversation with the interviewees. Maxwell (2013) explained that this entails composing the interview questions
differently from the research questions by stating that ‘‘research questions formulate what you want to understand; your
interview questions are what you ask people to gain that understanding’’ (p. 101). Thus, the authors of this study utilized
everyday language of the interviewees in the questions, and avoided the theoretical language often utilized in writing
Table 1
List of research inquiry, data sources, and data analysis.
Research inquiry
Data sources
Data analysis approach
Pedagogical beliefs about
the EDP and CRP
Quantitative: CRTOE (Siwatu, 2007) and
DET (Yas¸ar et al., 2006) surveys
Descriptive analysis
Qualitative: reflective journals; interviews
Three rounds of content analysis: first cycle (in vivo),
second cycle (in vivo and values), and third cycle
(pattern) coding methods
Barriers encountered during
implementation of EDP and CRP
Quantitative: DET survey
Descriptive Analysis
Qualitative: reflective journals;
interviews; member checking
Content analysis: three rounds of content analysis: first
cycle (in vivo), second cycle (in vivo and descriptive),
and third cycle (pattern) coding methods
Perceived role in implementation
of EDP and CRP in content area
Teaching philosophy statements;
interviews; reflective journals;
member checking
Three rounds of content analysis: first cycle (in vivo),
second cycle (in vivo and descriptive), and third cycle
(pattern) coding methods
210
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
4
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
research questions (Brinkmann & Kvale, 2015). Moreover, to conduct a conversational dialogue that still maintains the
goals of the research, the authors utilized four types of interview questions recommended by researchers: (1) introductory;
(2) transitional; (3) key or integral; and (4) closing questions (Castillo-Montoya, 2016; Creswell, 2008; Krueger & Casey,
2009; Merriam, 2009). The third phase ensures that reliability and trustworthiness of the interview protocol are strengthened
by obtaining feedback. This was provided by an additional mixed-methods researcher who is involved with the NSF grant
that funds the fellowship. For the fourth and final phase, a pilot interview was conducted with an educator not associated
with the fellowship grant only to pilot instrument (Baker, 1994; Merriam, 2009). Still, while the pilot was not conducted
with a group of participants or someone associated with the fellowship, it is important to note that according to Castillo-
Montoya (2016) many researchers may only be able to carry out the first three phases of the IPR process. Castillo-Montoya
explained that this may be due to a lack of access to resources, time, or willing participants, nevertheless, ‘‘those researchers
have taken important steps to increase the reliability of their interview protocol as a research instrument and can speak to
that effort in their IRB applications as well as any presentations or publications that may result from their research’’ (p. 827).
Consequently, this research utilized IPR to develop interview questions that elicit insightful responses with strategic
alignment to the research purpose and were conducted through a protocol that strengthens the reliability and trustworthiness
of the research. Table 3 displays a sample of the interview questions with cells marked to indicate which construct of the
research is being addressed through each question (Neumann, 2008).
In addition to interviews and reflection journals, the participants also provided their teaching philosophy statements.
These statements generated an additional self-reported data source that gave insights regarding the teachers’ agency along
with how they perceive their role in educational reform. The statements were analyzed for alignment with the teachers’
Table 2
Four steps to interview protocol refinement.
Step #
Protocol action
1
Alignment of interview questions with research questions
2
Developing an inquiry-based dialogue
3
Acquiring feedback on the interview protocol
4
Piloting the interview protocol
Note. Adapted from Castillo-Montoya (2016).
Table 3
Sample excerpt from interview matrix.
Interview question
Background
information
Teacher agency Teacher beliefs
Transition statement: I’d like to begin the interview by first asking you some questions regarding your school and/or district.
Q1. Can you describe your school setting for me?
X
Q2. How long have you been teaching at this school/district?
X
Transition statement: Great. Next, I’d like to discuss your perceptions about the constructs of engineering design process (which I will abbreviate
as EDP) and culturally responsive pedagogy (which I will abbreviate as CRP).
In your reflection journal you described how you used EDP to augment your project by
,insert description.
X
X
Q3a. How do you define EDP in your classroom context?
Q3b. How did the infusion of EDP change this project?
Q3c. Do you see room for infusing EDP pedagogy in other curricular projects you are currently
using?
In the reflection journal, you described how you used CRP to augment your project by
,insert description.
X
X
Q4a. How do you define CRP in your classroom context?
Q4b. How did the infusion of CRP change this project?
Q4c. Do you see room for infusing CRP pedagogy in other curricular projects you are currently
using?
Q5. What connection/s have you made between EDP and CRP? Please describe the
connections you see or lack thereof.
X
Note. Adapted from Castillo-Montoya (2016).
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
211
5
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
reflections and reactions to the implementation of new instructional practices. Thus, their philosophy on teaching helped
support and explain their agentic behaviors and beliefs.
Member Checking
Member checking can take place at different points in data collection and can often include sending the transcript of an
interview to the participants (Doyle, 2007). The approach utilized in this research provides the participants with a more
involved role in the process of telling their story. Member checking through synthesis of analyzed data (Harvey, 2014)
allowed participants to read through the researchers’ interpretations of their statements. In this case, the interpretations
include results and findings from surveys, interviews, reflection journals, and teaching philosophy statements. As explained
by Birt et al. (2016), ‘‘if studies are undertaken to understand experiences and behaviors and to potentially change practice,
then surely participants should still be able to see their experiences within the final results’’ (p. 1805). This approach
complements a constructivist approach for data analysis as it allows the participants to reflect upon their own responses
and stories while having the opportunity to add more data, help validate the findings, and minimize researcher bias in
interpretation (Birt et al., 2016; Doyle, 2007).
Quantitative Data Collection
In an effort to investigate the beliefs teachers hold regarding EDP the participants were asked to complete the quantitative
DET survey. Yas¸ar et al. (2006) developed a quantitative instrument to assess the perceptions K-12 teachers hold regarding
teaching with DET. DET was defined to include the following characteristics: identifying a problem vis-a-vis technology,
proposing solutions by understanding cost–benefit rations, selecting a solution based upon limiting parameters,
implementing with a model, and using the solution as a form of communication. The authors explained that the
combination of the design, engineering, and technology approaches allows for ‘‘conceiving, building, maintaining, and
disposing of useful objects and/or processes in the human-built world’’ (Yas¸ar et al., 2006, p. 205). The authors further
related their definition of technology to that established by the national science standards. As such, DET was defined to
include the following characteristics which also mirror the practices outlined by the Massachusetts Department of Education
(DOE) (2016) along with other prominent EDP models:
identify a problem or a need to improve on current technology; (2) propose a problem solution; (3) identify the costs and
benefits of solutions; (4) select the best solution from among several proposed choices by comparing a given solution to
the criteria it was designed to meet; (5) implement a solution by building a model or a simulation; and (6) communicate
the problem, the process, and the solution in various ways. (Massachusetts DOE, 2016, p. 205)
For the purpose of examining teacher beliefs regarding CRP, this study utilized the CRTOE scale (Siwatu, 2007). As is
true for the theoretical foundation of this research, Siwatu (2007) was also guided by Bandura’s (1977, 1986) theoretical
lens of social cognitive theory. Siwatu (2007) differentiated between the self-efficacy and outcome expectancy scale, the
latter of which is used for this study, by explaining that outcome expectations ‘‘are individual judgments about the potential
outcomes of their behaviors’’ (p. 1088). Siwatu (2007) asserted that the competencies selected for the instruments are rooted
in literature that reflects the voices of practitioners and pioneers in research who have advocated for the culturally sensitive
and relevant teaching practices that associated closely with a CRP approach. The author noted that these instruments were
developed due to shortage of scales that measure preservice or practicing teacher beliefs regarding CRP: ‘‘despite the
changing demographics of today’s schoolchildren, little research has been done to examine preservice and in-service
teachers’ culturally responsive teaching self-efficacy and outcome expectancy beliefs. The development of the CRTSE and
CRTOE would allow for these needed inquiries’’ (Siwatu, 2007, p. 1089). Both surveys were administered to teachers
completing their lessons infused with EDP and CRP.
Data Analysis
Cases were analyzed using a concurrent triangulation design (Creswell, 2008; Creswell & Plano-Clark, 2007), which
warrants collecting and analyzing the quantitative and qualitative data concomitantly within and across the cases. The
triangulation design is the most commonly used approach in mixed-methods research as it allows the investigator ‘‘to obtain
different but complementary data on the same topic’’ (Morse, 1991, p. 122), thus achieving a deeper understanding of the
topic or problem. The convergent model of triangulation design (Creswell, 1999) allows the researcher to compare results
derived from quantitative and qualitative approaches in order to validate, confirm, and corroborate the qualitative findings
and with quantitative results (Creswell, 2008). In the present research, the authors examined teacher beliefs regarding the
212
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
6
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
implementation of the EDP and CRP approaches through multiple lenses and further verified the findings across the cases
(Creswell, 2014). Consequently, this research employed the mixed methods triangulation approach to corroborate
participants’ survey results (quantitative) with interview transcripts, reflective journal responses, and teaching philosophy
statements (qualitative) to better understand the beliefs and agency of secondary mathematics and science teachers upon
implementing EDP and CRP in their respective content (math or science) instruction.
This research utilized an inductive approach (Saldan˜a, 2013) for coding that minimized researcher bias through the search
for prescribed themes, and yielded an exploratory study that allowed the participants to drive the findings. All the qualitative
data sources (i.e., interviews, reflection journals, and teaching philosophy statements) underwent three rounds of coding in
an effort to establish rigor in the analysis and thoroughly derive the emerging themes. The first round involved in vivo
coding which is at times referred to as natural or emic coding, implying that it involves the inductive approach for coding
verbatim terms or phrases used by the participant. Saldan˜a (2013) explained that this approach is most appropriate when the
study prioritizes the participant’s voice in the data analysis process.
The second round of coding utilized both in vivo and values coding methods. Values coding has been described by
Saldan˜a (2013) as ‘‘the application of codes to qualitative data that reflect a participants’ values, attitudes, and beliefs,
representing his or her perspectives or worldview. Though each construct has a different meaning, values coding, as a term,
subsumes all three’’ (p. 131). Values coding was appropriate for this research not only because it focuses on an individual’s
beliefs, a pivotal feature of this research, but, also, because it is recommended for case studies. Furthermore, values coding,
when applied to multiple data sources, helps corroborate the coding and strengthen trustworthiness (LeCompte & Preissle,
1993; Saldan˜a, 2013). Finally, the third and final round of coding utilized a second-cycle coding method, pattern coding.
Second-cycle coding allows researchers to ‘‘reorganize and reanalyze the data coded through first cycle methods’’ (Saldan˜a,
2013, p. 234). Specifically, pattern coding is utilized to meta code or group similarly identified codes, while also ascribing
meaning to the newly organized categories or emergent themes. Thus, pattern codes combine the data from first-cycle
coding and synthesizes it into more meaningful units of analysis (Miles et al., 2014; Saldan˜a, 2013).
The quantitative data analysis consisted of utilizing the descriptive data collected through surveys. In addition to the
survey responses, this includes teachers’ demographic information, such as gender, age, race, number of years of teaching
experience, certification, secondary grade level, and content area. Moreover, descriptive statistics for the schools in which
each participant taught are also presented which includes demographic data of the student population. The descriptive data
were triangulated with the qualitative findings for analysis within and across each case.
Findings
The five identified cases consisted of teachers with experience ranging from 6 to 13 years in the classroom, as shown in
Table 4. Four of the participants are science teachers while one teaches mathematics. Moreover, three of the participants are
middle school teachers and two teach high school. Three of the teacher participants have bachelor’s degrees in their content
area while the other two have background in education or interdisciplinary studies.
Of the five cases included in this study, four teachers identified as female. Three participants identified as Hispanic while
the other two identified as Non-Hispanic/White. Table 5 shows the combinations of gender and race/ethnicity included in
this study.
Table 6 shows the characteristics of the schools and districts in which the five participants are currently teaching. All,
with the exception of one, teacher participants work for schools with over 40% of the student population classified as
economically disadvantaged, a designation indicating that a student is eligible for free or reduced-price meals under the
National School Lunch and Child Nutrition Program (Texas Education Agency, 2014). These schools also house over 50%
of students identified as part of minority populations.
Culturally Responsive Teaching Outcome Expectations
The CRTOE survey (Siwatu, 2007) is designed to provide insight into the set of beliefs that teachers hold about the
positive outcomes associated with culturally responsive teaching practices. The survey is a self-reported measure
whereupon teachers rate the possibility of positive student outcomes achieved through 26 culturally responsive instructional
techniques. The teachers rate each strategy on a scale from zero which is indicative of ‘‘entirely uncertain’’ to 100 which
implies ‘‘entirely certain.’’ Siwatu (2007) developed the survey and described the items as a measure of ‘‘teachers’ beliefs
that engaging in culturally responsive teaching practices will have positive classroom and teaching outcomes’’ (p. 1090).
Therefore, high scores on the CRTOE scale reflect greater beliefs associated with positive outcomes that result from
culturally responsive instruction. Table 7 includes the participating teachers’ mean scores.
The CRTOE survey (Siwatu, 2007) scores for teachers in this research ranged from 2330 to 2595 out of a maximum
possible score of 2600. The teachers had a mean (M) score of 2532.60 and standard deviation (SD) was 273.72. The item
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
213
7
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
that yielded the highest level of positive teaching outcomes expectation was for the possibility that ‘‘students’ self-esteem
can be enhanced when their cultural background is valued by the teacher’’ (M 5 98.40; SD 5 2.06).
Teachers also expressed high levels of outcome expectancy for the following possibilities: ‘‘students’ academic
achievement will increase when they are provided with unbiased access to the necessary learning resources’’ (M 5 98.20;
SD 5 1.94); ‘‘providing English language learners with visual aids will enhance their understanding of assignments’’ (M 5
98.20; SD 5 2.23); ‘‘connecting my students’ prior knowledge with new incoming information will lead to deeper
learning’’ (M 5 98.20; SD 5 1.83); and ‘‘a positive teacher–student relationship can be established by building a sense of
trust in my students’’ (M 5 98.20; SD 5 1.83). The last statement was also the highest scored item for Siwatu (2007) who
developed the survey and measured the beliefs of 275 preservice teachers.
Meanwhile, the teachers’ CRTOE beliefs were lowest for the possibility that ‘‘simplifying the language used during the
presentation will enhance English language learners’ comprehension of the lesson’’ (M 5 84.40; SD 5 15.47). This was
Table 4
Teacher participants’ educational profiles.
Teacher
Number of years
teaching
Grade level
Content area
Bachelor’s degree
Ashley
9
6–8
Science
Interdisciplinary studies
Karen
13
6–8
Science
Education
Michelle
4
6–8
Science
Biological sciences
David
6
9–12
Science
Kinesiology
Sophia
11
9–12
Mathematics
Mathematics
Note. Educational profile data were collected from survey and interview responses.
Table 5
Self-reported teacher demographics.
Teacher
Gender
Self-identified race or ethnicity
Ashley
Female
Hispanic
Karen
Female
Non-Hispanic/White
Michelle
Female
Hispanic
David
Male
Hispanic
Sophia
Female
Non-Hispanic/White
Note. Data reported were collected from demographic survey questions.
Table 6
Teachers’ school characteristics.
Teacher
School type
School minority Pct.
School Eco Dis. Pct.
District minority Pct.
District Eco Dis. Pct.
Ashley
6–8
59.0%
49.4%
67.0%
56.0%
Karen
6–8
32.1%
7.9%
48.2%
28.8%
Michelle
6–8
96.2%
82.5%
67.0%
56.0%
David
9–12
75%
46%
78.4%
77.1%
Sophia
9–12
78.1%
97.6%
94.4%
80.3%
Note. Pct., percentage of total; Eco Dis., economically disadvantaged. All data are reported by schools to the government based on the 2015–2016 school
year and accessed through U.S. News Education (2019).
Table 7
Teacher mean scores on the CRTOE survey.
Teacher
Mean score
Ashley
2548.00
Karen
2453.00
Michelle
2337.00
David
2595.00
Sophia
2330.00
214
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
8
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
also the item with the highest level of standard deviation with a minimum score of 65 and the maximum score of 100.
The next lowest scored item for outcome expectancy was ‘‘matching instruction to the students’ learning preferences will
enhance their learning’’ (M 5 88; SD 5 10.18).
Design, Engineering, and Technology
The DET instrument (Yas¸ar et al., 2006) was developed to measure teacher perceptions of teaching with engineering
design. The responses regarding barriers encountered helped provide a deeper understanding of what teachers expect to self-
react towards as part of agency when implementing a project inclusive of the EDP. It is interesting to note that teachers
displayed the highest level of variation on the responses regarding barriers in integration DET. Specifically, statements
22–24 each garnered a mean of 3.2 and SD of 1.09 with responses ranging from 4 (maximum) to 2.00 (minimum) on a
5-point scale. This variation is striking when considering that on all other questions the mean value was 4.60 or higher, and
SD was 0.55 or lower. Moreover, 10 questions out of the total 24 resulted in a mean value of 5 (SD 5 0). An additional nine
questions resulted in mean of 4.80 (SD 5 0.45). Lastly, the survey also resulted in one question each for mean value of
4.60 (SD 5 0.55) and mean value of 4.0 (SD 5 0). Statements 22–24 questioned how strongly teachers agree or disagree
upon whether the lack of administrative support is a barrier when implementing DET. The statements also questioned how
strongly teachers agree or disagree with ‘‘minorities and women’’ being perceived by others as populations who do well in
DET. This variation may be suggestive of teachers’ personal experiences, along with those reported from their students who
belong to these underrepresented populations in STEM. Table 8 provides the total scores and mean values for each teacher
participant. The scores ranged from 110 to 114, out of a maximum possible score of 120.
Pedagogical Beliefs about CRP and EDP
Through reflective journals and individual interviews, teachers shared their definitions of CRP and the EDP. The
definitions provided remained consistent within each individual’s data sources and were also common in language across
the participants. Teachers explained the EDP as an iterative cycle encompassing the following steps: identifying a problem,
brainstorming solutions, designing prototypes, and redesigning to address the problem at hand (Baker, 1994; Katehi et al.,
2009; Yas¸ar et al., 2006). CRP was defined by teachers as an approach centered on students’ cultural backgrounds and lived
experiences that contribute to students’ funds of knowledge which are then integrated into instructional content lessons
(Aguirre & del Rosario Zavala, 2013; Gutie´rrez, 2009; Siwatu, 2007, 2011). The common language and description of the
constructs are expected because the teachers shared their introduction to the pedagogical approaches through the graduate-
level coursework as part of their master’s degree program. Still, upon completion of summer courses, each teacher returned
to their individual school/district and implemented the CRP and EDP to fit their content curricula. In doing so, teachers
experienced varying levels of support from team members and administrators at their schools as shared through reflective
journals and during interviews.
The most critical factor influencing teachers’ beliefs and agency was the reaction of their students towards the projects
infused with CRP and EDP. The teacher participants reported heightened interest in content, student engagement, and
improved academic performance. Teachers felt encouraged by the positive learning outcomes and were driven to continue
future implementation. They viewed their students’ reactions as a benchmark to assess their own effectiveness with the
enactment of EDP and CRP. Moreover, upon successful implementation and receiving positive student feedback,
the teachers felt empowered in their capacity to advocate for others to use CRP and EDP. As such, an important take-away
for teacher educators is framing the introduction of instructional practices through the lens of student outcomes.
The Engineering Design Process
The definitions that teachers provided for the EDP were consistent with those rooted in the literature (Hynes et al., 2011;
Yas¸ar et al., 2006). The teachers described the steps which include defining the problem (Cross & Roozenburg, 1993),
Table 8
Teacher scores on the DET survey.
Teacher
Mean score
Ashley
112.00
Karen
110.00
Michelle
113.00
David
112.00
Sophia
114.00
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
215
9
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
researching solutions, identifying constraints, building prototypes, testing, redesigning, and communicating solutions
(Massachusetts DOE, 2016). One of the participants, Michelle, discussed helping her students acknowledge the value in
their prototypes even when the products did not function properly. She shared that she had her students verbalize all the
ways in which their prototype was successful and reflect on lessons learned along the way. This is in alignment with
research that argues the EDP can foster a sense of perseverance in students through the design and redesign steps involved
in the experience (Lottero-Perdue & Parry, 2017). The iterative nature of engineering design assumes that the first few
prototypes will not function successfully or provide the best solution to the identified problem (Cunningham & Carlsen,
2014). This process of failing and moving forward is productive as students and engineers learn and obtain data through
trial (Lottero-Perdue & Parry, 2017). Petroski (2012) explained the role of failure in the field of engineering and the EDP:
‘‘…because every successful design is the anticipation and obviation of failure, every new failure no matter how seemingly
benign presents a further means towards a fuller understanding of how to achieve a fuller success’’ (p. 45).
Thus, the experiences acquired through the EDP encourage students and teachers to embody a growth mindset, defined
by Ricci (2013) as ‘‘a belief system that suggest one’s intelligence, or skills, or talents, can be grown or developed with
persistence effort, and focus on learning’’ (p. 3). Growth mindset has proven to yield positive student learning outcomes
through enhanced academic performance (Blackwell et al., 2007). The EDP cultivates a growth mindset through student
engagement with ‘‘test to failure experimentation’’ (Lottero-Perdue & Parry, 2017, p. 50). Accordingly, the Framework for
K-12 Science Education has specifically included testing for failure as one of the core ideas found in K-12 science and
engineering practices (National Research Council, 2012).
All the teacher participants stated that they observed high levels of student engagement and creativity during the course of
the projects. Overall, the teachers found themselves pleasantly surprised regarding the increase in student involvement
through participation in the EDP. David expressed that the feedback from his students led him to wish that he had learned
about, and incorporated, EDP earlier in his teaching career. Similarly, all teacher participants also shared that they witnessed
heightened levels of engagement in students who otherwise lacked interest in daily instruction. Therefore, due to the
creativity and student ownership resulting from the EDP projects, students were more likely to experience positive attitudes
towards content topics (Goeser et al, 2009).
David discussed a student in his class who was deeply immersed in the sketching and development of her prototype
designs. However, David noted that after the project concluded, this student returned to previous behavioral characteristics,
which meant lower levels of engagement and involvement in the classroom. Hence, the utilization of the EDP as a vehicle
for teaching mathematics or science content provided a hands-on alternative to routine-based, traditionalistic teaching
practices (Hynes et al., 2011). Furthermore, the iterative nature of EDP naturally allowed for the incorporation of scientific
reasoning and mathematical problem-solving (Blackwell et al., 2007; Lachapelle & Cunningham, 2014). Consequently, the
secondary mathematics and science teacher participants in this research affirmed the positive student outcomes associated
with the EDP. These beliefs were also reflected in the overwhelmingly positive responses expressed by the teachers
regarding future use of the recently implemented project along with future integration of the EDP in their content curricula.
Culturally Responsive Pedagogy
When asked to define CRP all teachers emphasized the value in learning about their students’ backgrounds. The teachers
explained that doing so would allow them to tailor their instruction by connecting the students’ lived experiences to content
topics. This concept of building relevance with students is an integral component mentioned in scholarly definitions of CRP
(see Gay, 2002; Ladson-Billings, 1994, 2009; McAllister & Irvine, 2002). Sophia shared that she planned to survey her
students to use specific pieces of their cultural and family background into her projects. This is reminiscent of the
community mapping project described by Jackson and Boutte (2018). Community mapping is an activity through which
current and prospective teachers can include walks around the neighborhood and engage in conversations with local
residents. The purpose of the exercise is to provide teachers with insights about students’ culture and their life experiences
outside of school (Jackson & Boutte, 2018). The value of cultivating relevance is grounded in CRP research and was
prevalent in this dissertation study through the teacher participants’ responses about their beliefs. This was also evidenced
through the teachers’ high scores and mean values resulting from the CRTOE survey responses.
Furthermore, as David’s students learned, the STEM workforce is not always representative of a diverse student body.
David asked his students to develop social media profiles for famous engineers to whom they could relate. Some of the
students, specifically those of color, struggled to do so, and one ultimately developed a profile with a silhouette to recognize
the lack of diversity in the field of engineering. In the USA, only 4.3% and 7.0% of all engineers self-identify as part of
African American and Latinx populations, respectively (National Science Foundation & National Center for Science and
Engineering Statistics, 2017). This student’s personal crisis with the STEM workforce was an important realization for him
to have as it led him to acknowledge the disparity in the field and aspire to change the national statistics. It is this
disproportionate representation of Black and Latinx populations that scholars have cited as a vital reason for considering the
216
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
10
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
cultural and linguistic background of students, and, therefore, provide culturally responsive instruction (Aguirre & del
Rosario Zavala, 2013; Gutie´rrez, 2009; Gutstein, 2006; Siwatu, 2011).
Although David’s project did yield conversations about race and representation in STEM, absent from the CRP
integration in all projects was a strong focus on social justice. Ladson-Billings (1994) defined CRP through three prominent
tenets for instructional practices: (1) upholding high expectations for all students; (2) guiding students through the
development of their cultural competence; and (3) fostering a sense of critical sociopolitical and cultural consciousness in
students. The third outcome described by Ladson-Billings (1994) involves the development of critical consciousness which
fosters the cultivation of an individual’s sociopolitical awareness through cultural, social, and political engagement
(Mustakova-Possardt, 1998). CRP empowers students to identify and tackle the injustices and inequities that impact their
lives and represent the experiences of disenfranchised populations (Aguirre, 2009). Consequently, social justice has gained
traction as an integral component of culturally responsive instruction, especially in the field of mathematics (Aguirre, 2009;
Gutie´rrez, 2009; Gutstein, 2006). The incorporation of CRP in mathematics concepts has shown to tackle a variety of topics
ranging from the institutionalization of racism in mortgage lending practices (see Gutstein, 2006) to the use of quantitative
analysis to challenge a school district’s decision for closing a neighborhood school (see Varley-Gutie´rrez, 2010).
Consequently, for teachers to embody the aspect of CRP that encourages social justice, they must acknowledge that
teaching their content is a political, rather than neutral, exercise (Aguirre & del Rosario Zavala, 2013).
Some of the projects designed by the participating teachers addressed social inequities in terms of access to resources and
lack of diversity in the STEM workforce. Still, the sociopolitical consciousness was not directly evidenced in any of the
projects. During the summer course and planning for the project, teachers were asked to align their projects with the eight
dimensions of the culturally responsive mathematics and science teaching (CRM/ST) lesson analysis tool, originated by
Aguirre and del Rosario Zavala (2013). The teachers all indicated that their projects met the cultural competence category
which ensured the lesson utilized students’ funds of knowledge, culture, and community support. Additionally, this
competency manifested throughout the themes and meta-patterns identified in this research. Still, the use of critical
knowledge to address social justice was lacking in the projects, and therefore not indicated on the teachers’ alignment to the
CRM/ST rubric. However, that is to be expected provided that this was the teachers’ first year in the master’s degree
program and fellowship. Therefore, the projects were based upon their initial introductions to CRP, and representative of
their first attempt at integration.
While the projects that teachers designed did not include social justice at this juncture, the concept of empathy was
prevalent throughout student experiences and teacher self-reflections. Ashley’s project allowed students to acknowledge
that they lack access to warm meals unless purchased at their school. They developed prototypes for insulative-heaters
which the students tested by self-utilization of food brought from home. Given that Ashley’s school has no microwaves in
the cafeteria, her students expressed that they were happy to have developed their protype. Students explained that, prior to
doing so, many of them were consuming cold meals for lunch. In this case, the students were able to reflect upon how the
topics in their science class can be used to provide access to resources for their community. Karen’s students had a similar
realization as they were given the option to develop a heavy load carrier for the librarian or the coaching staff. Students felt
so motivated to help their selected recipient that many asked if they would ultimately scale their prototype to size to ensure
that they could truly be of service. Additionally, Michelle shared that her students were deeply motivated by the concept of
developing prosthetic models for veterans and others in need. She explained that her students researched additional
disabilities, beyond those included in the assignment, and began brainstorming prototypes that would make life easier for
those individuals.
This desire from the participating teachers to incorporate a sense of service in their students contributes towards the
research offered by McAllister and Irvine (2002) on the role of empathy in CRP. An empathetic disposition on behalf of the
teachers is a quality that researchers have associated with effective instructional practices especially in urban and diverse
school settings (Darling-Hammond, 2000; Gordon, 1999). This quality allows individuals to foster sensitivity towards other
cultures and approach situations by bearing others’ perspectives and experiences in mind (Goleman, 1998). McAllister and
Irvine (2002) further explained the impact of empathetic teachers in diverse classrooms by stating the following:
Teachers are better able to modify pedagogy and curricula to fit their students’ needs, such as the teacher who changed a
classroom ritual to be more comfortable for her Vietnamese students by simply offering her students multiple ways to say
goodbye rather than obliging them to hug her before they left the classroom. (p. 2002)
The participating teachers’ willingness to promote these qualities in their students is a reflection in what they value within
themselves. The teachers shared the need to utilize their students’ funds of knowledge, experiences outside of school, and
cultural backgrounds when designing curricula. Additionally, they expressed that they felt connected to their students, even
those who were not engaged. The teachers reiterated throughout their interview and reflective journal entries their desire to
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
217
11
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
spark students’ interest and creativity in STEM-related topics. Hence, the teachers emphasized the need for culturally
responsive instruction, not only for the students enrolled in advanced courses, but, even more so, for the students in their on-
level or academic classes. The teachers advocated for these students in front of colleagues who felt the integration of CRP
and the EDP would be better suited for high-performing students. Moreover, teachers stated that they felt inspired by the
results from the project, which indicated not only improvement in academic performance but also involvement from
students who otherwise remained on the sidelines of the classroom. Consequently, the findings from this research support
the notion that the empathic disposition of teachers allows them to make efforts in utilizing their students’ funds of
knowledge (McAllister & Irvine, 2000). Furthermore, the findings suggest that emphatic teachers are likely to design and
value instruction that fosters a sense of service in students.
Contribution to the Field
This research is grounded in the assertion that it is of great significance to examine the ways in which teachers perceive
and define new pedagogical approaches upon implementation. The insights provided by teachers have implications for how
professional development providers and teacher educators present instructional practices to attain teacher buy-in. Moreover,
the beliefs teachers hold about the pedagogical constructs will guide their curricular decisions. Therefore, the pursuit of
teachers’ endorsement is important because it determines the likelihood of teachers engaging in the novel practices. It is
through investigation of the participating teachers’ beliefs that the authors uncovered a vital pedagogical perspective that is
indicative of how teachers will approach future implementations. The synergistic relationship between CRP and the EDP is
discussed in this section and contributes to the literature in each field of practice.
The Culturally Responsive Engineering Design Process
A key implication derived from this research is the connectivity between the EDP and CRP yielding a culturally
responsive engineering design process (CREDP). A significant pattern and finding that emerged from this research is that
upon enactment in unison, teachers perceived a powerful and natural relationship between the two pedagogical constructs.
Moreover, an important aspect of this finding was that while teachers were able to conceive implementing CRP in the
absence of the EDP, they were unable to do so in reverse. In other words, the value that teachers placed on implementing
engineering design with a culturally responsive lens was so strong that they were unable to commit to or visualize the
implementation of EDP without CRP. Teachers explained that through combined enactment they were able to reap the
benefits of both constructs simultaneously.
Castaneda and Mejia (2018) have connected the three tenets of CRP as defined by Ladson-Billings (1994) with the
standards established by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology for a civil engineering program.
Similarly, this research provides a framework that couples each of the three tenets of CRP with the iterative steps commonly
found in prominent versions of EDP as used in K-12 curricula. See Table 9 (Massachusetts DOE, 2016).
CRP Tenet I
Ladson-Billings (1994, 1995) described in her first tenet for CRP the importance of teachers adopting a mindset that
expects all students to become academically successful. Ladson-Billings (2006) later clarified the term ‘‘academically
successful’’ so to differentiate from student outcomes on high-stakes standardized tests, ‘‘What I envisioned is more
accurately described as ‘student learning’ what is that students actually know and are able to do as a result of pedagogical
interactions with skilled teachers’’ (p. 34).
As such, a teacher embodying CRP will need to approach students through an asset-based philosophy (Villegas & Lucas,
2002). This entails viewing students’ cultural and linguistic background as an opportunity for involvement in content versus
a characteristic that inhibits student potential. The practices in the EDP which include allowing students to identify the
problem or need, research the problem, develop, test, and evaluate models for solution are all grounded in this tenet of CRP.
It is important to note that the problem or need students are addressing must be framed around the students’ cultural context.
This was also identified as an important facet of their projects by all the participating teachers because it allowed for
purposeful incorporation of CRP into the EDP. Moreover, providing students with the opportunity to design their own
solution or prototype entrusts them with ownership over the problem and enables them to creatively address the problem
(Householder & Hailey, 2012; Hynes, 2010). This was evidenced by the teachers’ self-reported observations of their
students’ learning and engagement. Allowing students such experience naturally produces a student-centered classroom.
However, it is this nature of the EDP, when employed with cultural relevance to students, that can meet the objectives of
tenet I as described by Ladson-Billings (1994). Therefore, it is critical when connecting CRP with the EDP that the problem
have a culturally responsive or relevant context.
218
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
12
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
CRP Tenet II
According to Ladson-Billings (2006) the concept of fostering cultural competence in students is the most challenging
component of CRP to convey to educators. Cultural competence does not necessarily mean cultural sensitivity, but rather,
‘‘helping students recognize and honor their own cultural beliefs and practices while acquiring access to the wider culture’’
(Ladson-Billings, 2006, p. 36). In other words, students are not only learning to be respectful of other cultures, but truly
delving into the intricacies of cultures in a way that builds the conceptualization of their personal and collective cultures.
This tenet is associated with students designing solutions to solve a problem or need that is steeped in culturally relevant
context. Accordingly, to develop prototypes, conduct data analysis, and communicate solutions, students must be immersed
in understanding the cultural and/or linguistic context associated with the project. Providing students with the opportunity to
engage in these steps allows for the inclusion of tenet II into the EDP.
CRP Tenet III
Tenet III involves sociocultural and political consciousness. This area of CRP was the least evidenced in the teachers’
projects and is often less likely to appear in projects designed by teachers who are not well-versed or comfortable with CRP
(Gay & Howard, 2000; Young, 2010). Additionally, teachers often struggle with this concept of CRP because they are
lacking in their own sociopolitical consciousness (Gay & Howard, 2000). Still, should a teacher be willing to infuse this
tenet in their instruction, the EDP can be operationalized by solving a problem that is not only relevant and capable of
fostering cultural competence but also charged with addressing inequities and injustices in social, cultural, and political
settings. For example, in the culturally responsive mathematics assignment shared by Varley-Gutie´rrez (2010), students use
data analysis to challenge a school district’s decision to shut down a neighborhood school due to budgetary concerns.
A potential extension through incorporation of EDP for the same problem might include developing prototypes or
blueprints for modifications to the school that can result in efficiency and save the district money.
Teacher participants, having implemented the two constructs simultaneously through classroom projects, were convinced
that engineering design was most beneficial and worthwhile to use when it is immersed in their students’ cultural context.
All participating teachers acknowledged the value of each construct and were willing to embody CRP on its own, and as a
pivotal facet impacting instructional and curricular decisions. Nevertheless, based upon the positive outcomes experienced
through the synergistic enactment of CRP and EDP, the teachers felt compelled to frame each engineering design challenge
around a problem that was culturally responsive towards their students. Based on the findings from this study, formalizing
the relationship between the two constructs and adopting a CREDP have the potential to yield greater teacher buy-in which
is essential for all curricular reform efforts (Cheng & Huang, 2018).
Recommendations for Stakeholders
The findings from this research offer valuable recommendations for teacher educators, professional development
providers, and researchers. The research, while premised around CRP and the EDP, examined beliefs and agentic behaviors
of teachers. The participating teachers are part of a master’s program and fellowship designed to promote teacher leadership
and cultivate teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge around CRP and other innovative instructional approaches. Thusly,
the teachers’, prior to their integration of CRP and the EDP, already displayed signs of agency and motivation to improve
their own instruction and impact the practices of others.
Table 9
The EDP in relation to the three tenets of CRP.
Steps in EDP
Tenets of CRP
Identify the problem
Tenet I: Upholding high expectations for all students
Tenet II: Guiding students through the development of their cultural competence
Tenet III: Fostering a sense of critical sociopolitical and cultural consciousness in students
Brainstorm and research the problem
Tenet I: Upholding high expectations for all students
Develop solutions
Tenet II: Guiding students through the development of their cultural competence
Create a protype
Tenet I: Upholding high expectations for all students
Test and collect data to evaluate design
Tenet I: Upholding high expectations for all students
Communicate the solution
Tenet II: Guiding students through the development of their cultural competence
Redesign
Tenet II: Guiding students through the development of their cultural competence
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
219
13
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
The authors of this research recognize that examining beliefs and agentic behaviors is a complex process which is
dependent upon self-reported data (McAllister & Irvine, 2000, 2002). To further clarify the intentionality of the authors, this
research does not purport to draw any relationships between the teachers’ experiences in the fellowship to their self-reported
beliefs and instructional outcomes. The research instead seeks to understand the reactions teachers have to the pedagogical
constructs of CRP and the EDP upon implementation. The study examines how teachers define each construct after the
experience, the value they associate with approaches, and how those beliefs relate to their agency regarding continued
implementation. Below are recommendations that emerged from the findings and should be of interest and value to
stakeholders in the field of teacher education.
Recommendations for Future Research
The crux of this research lies in valuing the beliefs and insights of teachers because they are the most critical component
to any change in instructional practice. Much research has been conducted on exploring the value of each of the two
pedagogical constructs, the EDP and CRP. Some of these studies have involved teachers’ beliefs (see Siwatu, 2007; Yas¸ar
et al., 2006; Yoon et al., 2018). Nevertheless, there remains a shortage of research on investigating how teachers respond to
the instructional practices upon enactment in their classes. This is problematic because beliefs and attitudes are dynamic and
evolve through observations and experiences (Bandura, 1986). Therefore, the beliefs teachers have during their preservice
years, or upon introduction to an approach, are not entirely representative of how teachers will describe the value of the
instructional practices upon attempting them with their students. Moreover, examining these beliefs allows for the
researcher to gain insights on which aspects of the pedagogical approaches are most appealing to teachers and which
challenge them. Thus, the concepts that excite teachers can help researchers uncover strategies for introducing novel
instructional practices. Accordingly, addressing the areas that cause hesitation in teachers can help strengthen the reform
through targeted support.
Conclusions
Much like any instructional or pedagogical intervention, the teachers’ buy-in and beliefs surrounding the approaches will
determine the fidelity with which the constructs are implemented. This research provided insights on how teachers, who are
motivated to enact change, perceived the constructs of the EDP and CRP upon implementation. The teachers had no prior
experience with the pedagogical approaches before entering the program. Moreover, since their introductory coursework on
the topics, this iteration was their first time in adopting instruction inclusive of CRP and EDP. The insights and statements
captured during this research are reflective of their initial reactions to the implementation. The authors of this research
acknowledge that the teacher participants’ beliefs will likely evolve as they progress through the coursework and
professional development. However, first impressions are of significance because experiences and observations have the
power to influence agency towards future enactments. Additionally, the barriers these teachers encountered along the way
and how they self-reacted to persevere through those challenges are also of importance. The findings can serve as lessons
that will help strengthen the development of other teachers who are not as confident in their instructional abilities, or
comfortable with parting from teacher-centered practices.
Another key implication derived from this research is the connectivity between the EDP and CRP. Specifically, teacher
participants, having experienced the two constructs simultaneously, were convinced that the EDP was most beneficial and
worthwhile to use when it is immersed in their students’ cultural context. The teachers acknowledged the value of each
approach and shared their willingness to use CRP on its own. However, based upon the outcomes experienced through the
synergistic enactment of the EDP and CRP, the teachers felt compelled to frame each engineering design challenge around a
problem that was culturally responsive towards their students. Provided the power of teacher buy-in, this finding is of
critical importance to teacher educators in the fields of teacher development, STEM education, engineering education, and
CRP.
Finally, professional development providers and policy makers are urged to place teachers at the forefront of any
conversation that is charged with producing reform. Researchers are advised to examine the ways in which teachers
perceive, react to, and define instructional approaches that are deemed impactful. Involving willing teachers as active
contributors to the field, as opposed to passive recipients of instructional initiatives, can help cultivate teachers’ change
agency. Accordingly, this research underscores the importance of empowering teachers with professional development that
is shaped and informed by their beliefs and experiences. It is imperative to acknowledge and foster the power of teacher
change agents who if given the opportunity will transform traditionalistic approaches throughout our educational system.
220
M. Manuel et al.
/
Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research
14
https://doi.org/10.7771/2157-9288.1380
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Division of Undergraduate
Education 1759454. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
This paper is part of a set of papers recognized by the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE)’s Pre-College
Engineering Education Division as one of the division’s best papers from the 2022 conference. J-PEER republishes the
ASEE Pre-College Engineering Education Division’s best papers with permission from ASEE and under the ‘‘Invited
Contributions: Best Papers from ASEE Pre-College Engineering Education’’ section of the journal. J-PEER acknowledges
that ASEE holds the copyright for this paper, the original version of which can be accessed at: Manuel, M. (2022, August).
The intersection of culturally responsive pedagogy and engineering design in secondary STEM (Research to Practice).
Paper presented at 2022 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, Minneapolis, MN. https://peer.asee.org/41186
Author Bios
Mariam Manuel, Ph.D., is a Clinical Assistant Professor in the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics at the
University of Houston. Dr. Manuel’s experience in the classroom and working with students from diverse backgrounds
informs her research interests in the areas of STEM teacher education for diverse learners, and the use of culturally
responsive instruction in STEM with a focus on engineering design. Email: mamanuel@uh.edu
Jessica Gottlieb, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor in the Department of Educational Psychology, Leadership, &
Counseling. Dr. Gottlieb’s research focuses on how educational policy can be used to increase equity and access of
high-quality STEM education opportunities. Email: jessica.gottlieb@ttu.edu
Gina Svarovsky, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor of Practice at the University of Notre Dame Center for STEM
Education. For over two decades, Dr. Svarovsky has been interested in how young people, especially those from
traditionally underserved populations, learn science and engineering in both formal and informal learning environments.
Email: gsvarovsky@nd.edu
Rebecca Hite, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor of STEM Education at Texas Tech University. Dr. Hite’s research
foci include exploration of the cognitive and noncognitive affordances of emergent technologies, interventions, and
outreach intended to augment individual and collective STEM interest, attitudes, motivation, and identities. Email:
rebecca.hite@ttu.edu
