CSCL: Unit 1 Grade 5
Lesson 1.6: Pioneers and Problems Solved by
Computers
Objectives
In this lesson, students will:
❖ Be Introduced to Computer Science
pioneers
❖ Learn to reflect on and consider
problems in our lives that could be
solved by computers
❖ Research contributions by a Computer
Scientists
❖ Practice presenting their ideas to
others
Preparation
❏ Print student activity worksheet, one
per team.
Agenda
1. Computing Pioneers and
their Contributions
2. Student Activity: Role of
Computers in our World,
Exercise 1 or Exercise 2
3. Class Discussion and Wrap
Up
10 mins
25 mins
15 mins
Resources & Links
❏ Grace Hopper video:
https://tinyurl.com/hnvfywo
❏ Addendum: Computer Science
Pioneers (at the end of the lesson
plan). Can optionally be
incorporated into the lesson or
just used as reference material.
© Code for fun
Released under the Creative Commons By Attribution license
1
CSCL: Unit 1 Grade 5
1. Computing Pioneers and Their Contributions
The art of Computer Science often starts with a problem that needs to be solved. Throughout
history, humans are always in search of finding solutions to problems and to make things more
efficient, less dangerous and easier.
In the last 100 years or so, computers have played a big
role in solving problems around us and have a big impact on everything we do in life.
In the history of computing there have been many pioneers that have made big contributions to
the advancement of computing systems, often by trying to solve a problem they were faced
with.
One of the many computing pioneers was Grace Hopper. Here is a short video about
her:
https://tinyurl.com/hnvfywo
Class Discussion
Discussion Points:
●
Who was Grace Hopper?
●
What did she study?
●
What did she create?
●
What is she known for?
2. Student Activity: Role of Computers in our World
There are 2 exercises in this activity. Choose one for your class or optionally allow
students to choose the one they would like to work on. One of them could also be
used as a homework assignment.
Students are grouped into teams of 2-4.
Explain the exercise to students and relate the examples given below.
Exercise 1 Instructions:
© Code for fun
Released under the Creative Commons By Attribution license
2
CSCL: Unit 1 Grade 5
Explain the activity from the worksheet. Additionally, give the following example as a problem
that could be solved with the help of a computer.
Example of a problem that could be solved by a computing system:
A street light in Allan’s neighborhood has been out for 3 weeks. The street is very dark and it is
scary to walk there in the evening. The city has not fixed the light. Maybe they don’t know it is
broken? One way to solve the problem could be to install a sensor that detects the light does
not come on at night; it then sends a signal to a computer in the city office letting them know
the light needs to be fixed. That way it can be repaired as soon as it is broken.
Exercise 2 Instructions:
Explain the activity from the worksheet. Additionally, give the following example for Grace
Hopper of how they can answer the guiding questions for their research of another Computer
Science pioneer.
1. What did the person invent or build?
Grace Hopper created a compiler to translate source code into computer language
2. Where did they live and what did they study?
She lived in New York and studied Math and Physics
3. What problem did the person try to solve with a computer or computing system?
She believed computer languages should look like english. She created a compiler that
translates source code (programming language code we can read) into computer code.
4. What challenges did they have or overcome ?
She re-applied to Vassar college even though she was rejected the first time
5. What contribution did the person make to our history or what is the person known for?
She is known for the term “debugging”, she created a compiler and worked on the
COBOL language committee
After students complete the activity, each team shares their research and ideas as a team.
3. Class Discussion
Each team shares a few items from their research and team brainstorming exercise.
© Code for fun
Released under the Creative Commons By Attribution license
3
CSCL: Unit 1 Grade 5
Student Activity: Role of Computers in our World
Exercise I: Solving Problems with Computers
What to do:
1.
On your team, come up with some problems you see in your school, on the
street, in your city or in the world.
2. Somebody on the team should write down all your ideas and solutions. You
can take turns being the notetaker.
3. Pick 1 of the problems and discuss ideas of how computers could solve this
problem. If you finish early, pick another problem and come up with ideas of
how to solve it.
4. Be prepared to share your ideas as a team.
© Code for fun
Released under the Creative Commons By Attribution license
4
CSCL: Unit 1 Grade 5
Exercise II: Computing Pioneers
Here is a list of people who have made contributions to the advancement of
computers.
Alan Turing
Charles Babbage
Erna Schneider Hoover
Ida Rhodes
Ada Lovelace
Nakamatsu Yoshiro
Tim Berners-Lee
What to do:
1.
Pick a name from the list and conduct some online research on the person.
2. Focus your research on the person’s impact and contribution to Computer
Science. Try to answer the list of questions below about the person you
picked.
It is not necessary to answer every question, but as many as you can.
Be
prepared to share your research with the class.
3. Questions:
a. What did the person invent or create?
b. Where did they live and what did they study?
c. What problem did the person try to solve with a computer?
d. What challenges did they have or overcome?
e. What contribution did the person make to our history or what is the
person known for?
Be prepared to share.
© Code for fun
Released under the Creative Commons By Attribution license
5
CSCL: Unit 1 Grade 5
Addendum: Computer Science Pioneers
Do you know when the first computer was invented?
The answer depends somewhat on what we mean by computer. The first programmable
computer, the Z1 was created by German Konrad Zuse in his parents' living room between 1936
and 1938. It is considered to be the first electro mechanical binary programmable computer,
and the first really functional modern computer.
However, many years before that, in 1822, British mathematician and inventor Charles Babbage
invented the first mechanical computer. Mathematical tables were
important in Babbage’s era for use in navigation, science and
engineering. They were calculated by hand and then compiled into
tables. Errors were sometimes made either in the calculation or in
the compiling of the tables.
It is with this background that Babbage decided to design a
mechanical device that could perform calculations. Such a machine
would always be accurate and would save time and money.
During the mid-1830s Babbage developed plans for the Analytical
Engine, the forerunner of the modern digital computer. In that
device he envisioned the capability of performing any arithmetical
operation on the basis of instructions from punched cards, a memory unit in which to store
numbers, sequential control, and most of the other basic elements of the present-day
computer. His machines were considered as one of the very first mechanical computers ever to
be invented. The fact that they were not actually built was not due to a design flaw but rather, it
was due to lack of funding.
At a young age Ada Lovelace met Charles Babbage. They became
friends, and the much older Babbage served as a mentor to Ada.
Ada, a writer and also a mathematician, was fascinated by
Babbage's ideas and machines. Ada was later asked to translate an
article on Babbage's analytical engine. She not only translated the
original French text into English, but also added her own thoughts
and ideas on the machine. Her notes ended up being three times
longer than the original article.
© Code for fun
Released under the Creative Commons By Attribution license
6
CSCL: Unit 1 Grade 5
In her notes, Ada described how codes could be created for the device to handle letters and
symbols along with numbers. She also theorized a method for the engine to repeat a series of
instructions, a process known as looping that programs use today, as we know. Ada also
offered up other forward-thinking concepts in the article. For her work, Ada is often considered
to be the first computer programmer. Ada Lovelace's contributions to the field of computer
science were not discovered until the 1950s. Her notes were reintroduced to the world by B.V.
Bowden.
Another pioneer whose work and invention had a significant impact on humanity is
Alan Turing, often called the father of modern computing. He was a brilliant mathematician and
logician. He was the first person to think of using a computer to do things that were too hard for
a person to do. He developed the idea of the modern computer and artificial intelligence.
At the outbreak of World War Two, Alan
joined the Government Codes and
Cypher School at Bletchley Park. He
worked on breaking the code for the
German Enigma machine, a device for
sending coded messages to units of the
German forces. Alan developed a
machine (the Bombe) which helped
break the code. He also went on to break
the Naval Enigma, an even more
complicated machine. His wartime
services helped to win the war, but his
work was so secret that very few people
were aware of the importance of what he had done at Bletchley Park.
It has been estimated that his work shortened the war in Europe by more than two years and
saved over 14 million lives.
© Code for fun
Released under the Creative Commons By Attribution license
7
