THE EXCITEMEN
OF 
COLLABOR
As part of a project between a university 
and two public school districts, 
a college-level 
methods class develops and shares interdisciplinary lesson plans. 
he concept of collaboration is 
pervasive in the arts and edu- 
cation today. Arts organiza- 
tions and universities are 
being motivated by granting 
agencies to form partnerships with ele- 
mentary and secondary schools. Edu- 
cators are being encouraged to collab- 
orate across disciplines to create mean- 
ingful learning experiences for their 
students. Teachers are incorporating 
cooperative learning strategies into 
their classrooms so that students can 
enhance their learning by working 
together. 
In my university music education 
methods class, the students and I have 
been engaged in a project known as 
"U2U," an ongoing collaboration 
between the University of Minnesota 
School of Music, the University of 
Minnesota dance department, and the 
Twin Cities' two urban public school 
districts. The purpose of this article is 
to describe this program, to share 
strategies for collaboratively develop- 
ing an interdisciplinary curriculum 
around a particular musical work, and 
to provide two lesson plans based on 
these strategies for music educators' 
use in the classroom. These lesson 
plans can be modified and adapted for 
Claire 
W. McCoy 
is professor 
of music education 
in the School of Music at the University of 
Minnesota 
in Minneapolis. 
use by upper-elementary through high 
school classes. 
The U2U project provides perfor- 
mances by university students of a 
short chamber work with a dance or 
theatre component for elementary, 
Educators are being 
encouraged 
to 
collaborate 
across 
disciplines to create 
meaningful learning 
experiencesfor 
their 
students. 
middle, or high school students. The 
first U2U performance used the cham- 
ber scoring of Appalachian Spring by 
Aaron Copland, with new choreogra- 
phy on an immigration theme devel- 
oped by a member of the university 
dance department. Other perfor- 
mances' have included L'Histoire du 
Soldat by Igor Stravinsky, Facade by 
William Walton, The Queens Suite by 
Duke Ellington, and a compilation of 
geographically and stylistically diverse 
choral music related to the theme of 
storytelling. The performances were 
designed to be adaptable to the range 
of performance spaces available in 
public schools, from well-appointed 
auditoriums to cafeterias. Preceding or 
following the performances, the musi- 
cians and dancers taught students 
some of the elements of music or 
dance used in the performance, dis- 
cussed the meaning of the work per- 
formed, and answered questions about 
the training required to become a 
musician or dancer. 
Curriculum 
Development 
To prepare the public school stu- 
dents and their teachers for a perfor- 
mance of William Walton's Facade, 
music education majors in a secondary 
general music methods class developed 
curricula that focus on the music itself, 
as well as ways in which the music and 
dance could intersect with other disci- 
plines. As curriculum designers, the 
methods students were challenged to 
think about how an English teacher, a 
social studies teacher, and a history 
teacher, as well as a music teacher, 
might find the performances (in this 
case, Walton's Facade) relevant to their 
instructional goals. 
JULY 
2000 
37 
The collaborative 
projects 
always 
culminated 
in a performance 
given by university 
students 
for the public 
school students, 
who had been learning 
about the music through 
the developed 
lesson plans. 
In some cases, the development of 
this curriculum was the methods stu- 
dents' first foray into lesson planning 
of any kind. The idea that a first cur- 
riculum planning effort would be 
published and shared with experi- 
enced teachers may have seemed 
daunting, but the collaborative nature 
of the planning process gave the stu- 
dents the support they needed to 
develop creative yet focused plans. 
Early in the term, the arts coordi- 
nators for the school districts, the 
orchestra conductor, the choreograph- 
er, and the dance director met with 
the methods students to discuss the 
project and each person's role in it. 
The school district representatives 
provided information about the urban 
districts' demographics, an important 
consideration for the methods stu- 
dents who came primarily from subur- 
ban and rural schools. 
Working with a relatively unknown 
composition was a particular advan- 
tage in developing the curriculum. 
Before they could write plans for 
familiarizing the public school stu- 
dents with the work, the university 
students in the methods class had to 
understand it themselves. Thus, the 
curriculum writers were sensitized to 
what kinds of experiences a listener 
needs in order to become familiar with 
The collaborative 
nature 
of the planningprocess 
gave the students the 
support they needed to 
develop creative 
yet 
focusedplans. 
an unfamiliar work. Edith Sitwell's 
unusual poetry, which is an integral 
component of Facade, added another 
layer of challenge to the process of get- 
ting to know the piece. So, to make 
my students more familiar with 
Facade and to model some techniques 
for guiding listening, I led them 
through these steps: 
1. Divide a sheet of paper in half. 
2. Listen to several short movements 
from Facade and keep a list of all the 
things you notice while listening on 
the left half of the paper. 
3. After listening, think about what 
kinds of things would help you better 
understand the music you just heard 
and list them on the right half of the 
paper. 
Upon first hearing the music, my 
students were intrigued and a little 
bemused. To help them better under- 
stand the piece, they indicated that 
they wanted a second listening, a copy 
of the words and score, and CD liner 
notes; they also wanted to know who 
wrote it, when it was written, and the 
composer's intent. I gave the students 
a few items of information from their 
listeners' "wish list," such as the title 
and composer of the piece, a copy of 
the poems on which the movements 
were based, and a brief description of 
Sitwell's intent in writing the poetry. I 
also suggested that they think of the 
voice as an instrument. We listened 
again, and the students added more 
notes to the list of the things they 
noticed about the music. We then dis- 
cussed how having even a small 
amount of information about a piece 
can change a listener's perspective. 
The Facets Model 
The next step was to present to the 
methods students the "facets" model, a 
series of questions designed to pro- 
mote more comprehensive under- 
standing of an artistic work. The 
facets model asks these questions: 
* Who created it? 
* When and where was it created? 
* Why and for whom was it 
created? 
* What does it sound or look like? 
* What kind of structure or form 
does it have? 
* What is its subject? 
* What is being expressed? 
* What techniques did its creator 
use to help us understand what is 
being expressed? 
The methods students observed 
that many of the questions posed in 
the facets model were questions that 
they themselves had generated upon 
first hearing the Facade movements. 
Together, we framed research tasks 
around the various questions, and stu- 
dents chose to research those aspects 
of the work that most interested them. 
Some students researched the musical 
and historical context of the 1920s, 
MUSIC 
EDUCATORS 
JOURNAL 
38 
I An Introduction for Students to William Walton's Facade - 
Facade is a work for one reader and a small instrumental ensemble that resulted from a collaboration by Edith 
Sitwell and William Walton. It was first performed in Sitwell's home for family and friends in 1922. The work 
received its first public performance in London in 1923. The audience at the first public performance was not 
sure about what to make of Facade. 
Your reaction upon first hearing the work may be similar. If you don't understand all of the words at first and can- 
not decipher exactly what they mean, don't be dismayed. It was not Sitwell's intent that the words be like lyrics of 
a song that convey a clear, coherent story. Rather, she chose words for their sound and rhythm as much as, or in 
some cases, more than their meaning. Think of her poetry as dancing with sounds and rhythms. You might also 
think of the speaker's part in Facade as a percussion line that is heard in counterpoint with the other instruments 
in Walton's music. It might also be helpful to think of the long tradition of music in which the rhythm of the text 
plays an important element-from opera recitative to Gilbert and Sullivan patter songs to rap. 
To begin to understand Facade, you must listen to it several times. As the title implies, if you look beyond its sur- 
face, you may find deeper meaning. As you listen, read the poetry along with the performance. Move to the 
rhythms of the words. Delight in the bits of clever wordplay that float to your consciousness. 
the decade in which Facade was writ- 
ten. Others conducted biographical 
research on William Walton and Edith 
Sitwell. Others delved into the poetry, 
trying to understand how it worked 
and researching the allusions in the 
poems.2 Some students researched the 
dance forms upon which the poems 
and music were based, while others 
analyzed the relationship between the 
music and the text. The conductor, 
choreographer, and school arts coordi- 
nators joined the class again at its next 
meeting to hear the students report 
the results of their research. The 
excitement in the room was almost 
electric as the students shared what 
they had learned. It was as if under- 
standing Facade were a giant jigsaw 
puzzle that we were seeing take shape 
before our eyes as each person added a 
new piece of information. 
I then charged the students to 
design experiences for middle-school- 
age students to prepare them for a live 
performance. I encouraged them to 
use what they had learned about 
Facade (by answering the facets model 
questions) and what they had discov- 
ered in their own process of getting to 
know Facade. We identified some 
large topics or concepts to be included 
in the curriculum and discussed what 
approaches to the curriculum might 
appeal to a social studies or an English 
teacher, as well as a music teacher. We 
Collaborative 
projects 
often evolve with a 
degree of richness that 
individual ejforts cannot 
achieve. 
brainstormed about what "hooks" we 
could use to help students relate the 
music to their own experience and 
came up with ideas such as comparing 
the use of the rhythmic speech in 
Facade to rap music. The students 
found others in the class who were 
interested in exploring the same topic 
or concept and formed writing teams. 
Over the next several class periods, I 
provided additional instruction on 
topics that would be helpful to the 
students as they crafted their own 
lessons, including techniques for guid- 
ing listening, how to point out rela- 
tionships between poetry and music, 
and techniques for using movement to 
teach music concepts. 
The Value of Collaboration 
After each team had written its les- 
son plan, the students taught their les- 
son to the rest of the class. Through 
this process, the writers discovered 
which aspects of their lessons worked 
and which did not. Classmates provid- 
ed ideas for how to improve the lesson 
and suggested ways to combine several 
lessons into one. Each group revised 
its lesson and then submitted it to me 
to edit for publication. The lesson 
plans were passed on to the dance 
methods class students, who also cre- 
ated lessons for the curriculum. The 
finished curriculum was distributed to 
each school where Facade would be 
performed. Each student who partici- 
pated in the development and writing 
process was listed as a curriculum 
author.3 
Collaborations take time. They're 
messy. They're sometimes frustrating. 
Yet collaborations enable us to under- 
take projects of a scope that might be 
impossible for an individual to do 
alone. Collaborative projects often 
evolve with a degree of richness that 
individual efforts cannot achieve. All of 
these things were true of this project 
and its curriculum development com- 
ponent. The sidebars present an intro- 
duction to the project and two lessons 
that emerged from our collaborative 
work that can be used to explore Wal- 
ton's Facade with students or used as a 
model for curriculum planning. 
JULY 
2000 
39 
Lesson 1: Facade's Historical and Social Context 
National Music Standards Addressed 
* Listening to, analyzing, and describing music 
* Evaluating music and music performances 
* Understanding relationships between music, the other arts, and disciplines outside the arts 
* Understanding music in relation to history and culture 
National Social Studies Standards Addressed 
* Develop critical sensitivities such as empathy and skepticism regarding attitudes, values, and behaviors of people 
in different historical contexts 
Lesson Objectives: 
Students will: 
* Learn about the first performance of Facade and the significance of the work in the context of music of that time 
and place. 
* Discuss the music and styles of the 1920s and compare them to the music and styles of today. 
* Portray historical characters at a performance of Facade. 
* Develop and discuss their own opinion of Walton's Facade. 
Materials 
* 1920s time line (see below) 
? List of popular music hits from the 1920s (see below) 
Pictures from the 1920s 
* Descriptions of actual and fictitious members of an audience attending a Facade performance (see below) 
Introducing the Lesson 
Present the 1920s time line and show pictures of popular styles from the 1920s so students can get an idea of what 
life was like in that era. What were the new inventions? What was going on in politics and in the arts? Next, present the 
list of popular music, jazz, and blues hits. Do students recognize any of the songs? If possible, play recordings of some 
of the music that was popular in the 1920s. How does that music compare with today's popular music? 
Developing the Lesson 
Many people were shocked by the new fashions and music styles of the 1920s and found them radical. Some people 
liked these styles, but some did not. Like today, not everybody wanted to wear the same things or look the same way. 
The same is true of music. When composer William Walton teamed up with his friend Edith Sitwell to create Facade, 
some people liked it and some did not. 
1. Describe the first public performance of Facade to the class by giving information such as the following: The first 
public performance of Facade took place June 12, 1923, in London. Edith Sitwell performed as the speaker, but sat 
with her back to the audience behind a sheer curtain decorated with a picture of the moon. So that the audience could 
hear her, she used a sound-magnifying device called a Sengerphone. Although the audience seemed to enjoy Walton's 
music, reaction to Sitwell's poetry bordered on violence. Some walked out. Sitwell was warned to stay behind the cur- 
tain because one old woman was waiting to hit her with her umbrella. The public was not prepared for Sitwell's com- 
plex and sometimes indecipherable verse. 
2. Give each student a card with the descriptions of imaginary audience members with these instructions: You have all 
been invited to a re-creation of the first performance of Facade. For this re-creation, you need to take on the personali- 
ty of the character on your note card. Some of these people were actually at the first performance, and some were not. 
Those of you who have characters who were not at the original performance must still pretend as if they were. Read 
the descriptions of your character. Then pair up with another member of the class and find out who they are and what 
they do. Change partners several times so you can "meet" as many of the guests as possible. 
3. After students have become familiar with the audience for the performance, give these instructions: Listen to this 
piece with two sets of ears: one set as yourself, and one set as your character. What do you think about the music? 
What do you like, and what don't you like? What do you think your character would like about the piece? What do 
you think he or she wouldn't like? 
MUSIC 
EDUCATORS 
JOURNAL 
40 
4. Play several movements from Facade. Limit the first listening time to five minutes. Have students answer the follow- 
ing questions, either verbally or in a journal entry: 
? What were you expecting to hear? 
? Did you enjoy the performance? Why or why not? 
? Who was your character? 
* What do you think your character was expecting to hear? 
* Did your character enjoy the performance? Why or why not? 
? What did you learn about the piece? 
Actual Materials to Be Used in the Lesson: 
1. A 1920s Time Line: 
1920 
?American women win the right to vote. 
* Prohibition goes into effect in the United States. 
* Radio Corporation of America (RCA) is formed. 
? The League of Nations meets for the first time. 
1921 
* Modernism in the arts; at the Metropolitan Museum 
of Art viewers enjoy the works of Matisse, Manet, 
and Degas-they are shocked by the works of Picas- 
so. 
*Discovery of insulin is reported by two Canadian 
biochemists. 
1922 
* BBC begins first daily broadcast. 
* Soviet Russia is renamed the Union of Soviet Social- 
ist Republics (USSR). 
* Benito Mussolini becomes dictator of Italy. 
1923 
* Dance marathons become the craze. 
?Abbreviated one-piece bathing suits are banned in 
Atlantic City, New Jersey. 
*President Harding dies at age 57; Vice President 
Coolidge becomes president. 
1924 
* First Winter Olympics is held in Chamonix, France. 
mGershwin premieres "Rhapsody in Blue" in New 
York City. 
* Calvin Coolidge is elected president. 
1925 
Walter Chrysler forms the Chrysler Motor Compa- 
ny. 
?The "Charleston" and flapper dresses are all the rage. 
? Surrealist art is displayed in Paris. 
1926 
* First television is invented in Scotland. 
1927 
*Charles Lindbergh completes first nonstop solo 
flight from New York to Paris. 
* Babe Ruth hits sixtieth home run of the season. 
mAl Jolson stars in the first talking movie, The Jazz 
Singer. 
1928 
? First TV set goes on sale in United States for $75. 
?Herbert Hoover is elected thirty-first president of 
the United States. 
1929 
*Seven Chicago gangsters are slain by a firing squad 
of rivals in St. Valentine's Day massacre. 
* First coast-to-coast passenger airline service is estab- 
lished. 
* "Black Thursday"-the stock market crashes. 
2. Popular Music, Jazz, and Blues Hits of the 1920s: 
Louis Armstrong-"St. Louis Blues" 
George Gershwin-"Fascinatin' Rhythm" 
Jelly Roll Morton-"Dr. Jazz" 
Bessie Smith-"Careless Love" 
Duke Ellington-"Diga Diga Doo" 
Jerome Kern-"Old Man River" 
King Oliver's Creole Jazz Band-"Dipper Mouth Blues" 
Jimmie Rogers-"Blue Yodel ('T' for Texas)" 
Dixie Washboard Band-"I Found a New Baby" 
Ma Rainey-"See See Blues" 
JULY 
2000 
41 
3. Some Character Descriptions ofAttendees: 
The following descriptions are of some real people and some fictional characters whom students will imagine attend- 
ing a performance of William Walton's Facade in 1923. Of the persons described below, only Walton and Sitwell 
were really in attendance at the first public performance. The descriptions may be copied and placed on 5" x 7" cards 
for the students. 
* You are the composer William Walton. You were born in a small town in England in 1902. Your father was a strict 
music teacher who made you sing in choir. You tried to learn the piano and the violin, but you weren't very good. 
You liked to sing, and you were admitted to the Oxford Choir School. You are shy and reserved, but you have a 
strong inner character and sense of humor. Your father didn't want you to become a musician, but you composed 
your first piece when you were sixteen. In 1919, you went to live with the Sitwell family. Together with the poet 
Edith Sitwell, you composed Facade in 1921. 
* You are the poet Edith Sitwell. You were born in England in 1887. You have two younger brothers whom you 
adore. You were a rebellious child and didn't get along with your parents. You started reading when you were four 
and loved fairy tales. When you grew up, you became a poet who loved experimenting with words. You are a very 
independent woman, and you never married. You wrote Facade with William Walton in 1921. 
* You are Gerald Harris, a wealthy London businessman who likes many different kinds of music. Decked out in your 
finest tuxedo, you attend the Facade premiere and hope to enjoy a new young composer's fresh approach to music. 
Instead, you're appalled by the sparse texture and hard-to-understand words. You think it is so awful that you leave 
in the middle of the performance and vow never to go to another Walton concert. 
* Your name is Mandy West. You are an American flapper visiting London. You are carefree, and you wear exotic 
fashions like short skirts and rolled-down stockings. All you want to do is dance, sing, and have a lot of fun. You go 
to the Facade performance because you think it will be a big party. 
* You are George Gershwin. You were born in Brooklyn, New York. You are an American composer and pianist. You 
published your first popular song at the age of eighteen. In 1924, you will write the famous Rhapsody in Blue, a jazz 
piano concerto. Eventually, you will move to Hollywood to write music for film scores. Some of your famous com- 
positions will be "I Got Rhythm" and "Lady Be Good." You are always open to new ideas, and you like to find ways 
to incorporate them into your music. 
* You are Louis Armstrong. You are probably the greatest jazz soloist ever. You combined singing with magnificent 
trumpet technique and improvised solos. You are known as the King of Jazz, and your influence is felt by all jazz per- 
formers. In the 1920s, you have been playing with your own groups, "The Hot Five" and "The Hot Seven." Some of 
your famous recordings include "St. Louis Blues" and "Potato Head Blues." You enjoy new and exciting ideas, and 
you like to include them in your work and performances. 
* You are Rose Revell, a young artist and poet in the 1920s. Pictures and sounds fill the canvas of your life. While 
your friends have jobs and are beginning their families, you pass the time by reading, drawing, and pondering the 
meaning of life. You look forward to Walton's performance, and when it is over you describe it as a finely woven 
tapestry of words and music. You think that the way the rhythm of the words fits with the music is exciting. It's a 
wonderful blend of two art forms and is a thrill to listen to. 
* You are Betsy Swanson, a twenty-three-year-old seamstress. You also are up to date with fashion, movie stars, and 
popular culture. After work, you hang out at various nightclubs. You know numerous club owners and band mem- 
bers. A saxophone player invites you to the premiere of Walton's Facade. Thinking it is nothing more than a show 
tune with some dancing, you agree to go along. What you see and hear, however, is not at all what you were expect- 
ing, and you are surprised. As the performance progresses, you relax and admit that the poetry fits with the music 
fairly well. You would like to hear this piece again. 
* You are Calvin Coolidge, the President of the United States. You had been Warren G. Harding's vice president and 
became president when Harding died unexpectedly. In your term of office (1923-29), you reduced the national debt 
by $2 billion over three years! Your favorite pastimes include taking a nap after lunch, rocking on the White House 
porch after dinner, wandering around your family headquarters in your nightshirt, and pushing all the buttons on 
your desk at once to see your staff come running. You are visiting London in 1923, and you have been invited to the 
Facade performance. You are very curious about new ideas, including new ideas in music. 
MUSIC 
EDUCATORS 
JOURNAL 
42 
Lesson 2: Poetry, Music, and Movement 
National Music Standards Addressed 
* Listening to, analyzing, and describing music 
* Understanding relationships between music, the other arts, and disciplines outside the arts 
National Language Arts Standards Addressed 
* Students read a wide range of literature from many periods in many genres to build an understanding of the many 
dimensions (e.g., philosophical, ethical, aesthetic) of human experience. 
a Students apply knowledge of language structure, language conventions (e.g., spelling and punctuation), media tech- 
niques, figurative language, and genre to create, critique, and discuss print and nonprint texts. 
Objectives: 
Students will: 
* identify duple and triple poetic meters 
a categorize words by their poetic feet 
n create original poems in specified meters 
a recite poems to music with a corresponding meter 
* transfer a rhythmic pattern in music to movement 
Materials 
* Recordings of music in duple and triple meter 
Introducing the Lesson 
When we hear the word, "rhythm," we usually think of the rhythm of music. But words can have rhythm, too. A 
word's rhythm is shaped by how many syllables it has and which syllable is accented. Try this: When I say "one," pat 
your hands on your lap. When I say, "two," clap your hands together. Repeat this pattern with a steady beat. Now, as 
you clap, say the word "ap-ple," repeatedly. The first syllable, "ap-," should coincide with the lap pat, and the second 
syllable, "-ple," should coincide with the clap. Now do the same with the word "pan-cakes." Then combine the 
words into a phrase-"ap-ple pan-cakes"-speaking the syllables in synchronization with the pat-clap rhythm. Now 
try this pattern: When I say "one," pat your hands on your lap; on "two," clap your hands together; and on "three" 
snap your fingers. Now speak the word "cin-na-mon," while performing the three-beat pattern. Then try "ap-ple- 
sauce." Combine the two words for "cin-na-mon ap-ple-sauce." Did you notice that for all of these words, the accent 
was on the first syllable? The word accent always coincided with the lap pat. 
1. Have the students create a two-column chart. Tell them that they may label the columns as two-syllable words and 
three-syllable words or use the poetry terms "trochaic" and "dactylic." A "trochaic" foot is one stressed syllable fol- 
lowed by an unstressed syllable (as in ap-ple), and a "dactylic" foot is one stressed syllable followed by two unstressed 
syllables (as in cin-na-mon). 
2. Dictate the following words for students to place in the proper column: strawberry, marshmallow, waffles, muffins, 
batter, cereal, blueberry, butter, bagel, syrup, jelly, and berry. 
3. Students may wish to brainstorm words to fit other themes. From the list they create, such as types of athletic 
equipment, state names, and flowers, have them combine words with the same meter to create a poem. Here is an 
example: 
"Summertime" 
Barbecue 
Lemonade 
Here with you 
In the shade. 
4. Share the poems with the class. 
JULY 
2000 
43 
5. Read the excerpt below from "Waltz," by Edith Sitwell. (It is included in 
one of the movements of Facade.) 
Daisy and Lily, 
Lazy and silly, 
Walk by the shore of the wan grassy sea 
Talking once more 'neath a swan-bosomed tree. 1 
Try to recite the poem rhythmically while performing the pat-clap pattern. 
Then recite it while performing the pat-clap-snap pattern. Which pattern 
seems to fit most naturally with the metrical flow of the words? The triple- 
meter pattern should feel most natural with Sitwell's words in waltz rhythm. 
Extending the Lesson 
* Recite poetry to music that corresponds to the rhythm of the poem. For 
example, recite a poem in dactylic meter to a waltz. 
* Analyze the rhyme scheme of "Waltz" by Sirwell. 
* Another poetic device in "Waltz" is the repetition of sounds, specifically 
assonance (where particular vowel sounds sound alike; for example, "They 
run from and shun") and alliteration (where initial consonant sounds are 
repeated; for example, "Like bells of bright water from the clearest wood- 
well"). Can students find other examples of assonance or alliteration? Perhaps 
they know a verse or rhythm that contains such repetition. Tongue twisters 
are great examples of alliteration ("Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled pep- 
pers"). 
Notes 
1. Janet R. Barrctt, (Clairc W. Mc('oy, 
and Kari K. Veblcn, Sound Ways of Know- 
ing: Music in the Interdisciplinaly Curricu- 
lum (New York: Schirmer Books, 1997), 77. 
2. Idith Sitwcll, F'acade and Other 
Poems, 1920-1935 
(london: 
Duckworth, 
1950). 
3. 'I'he Facade curriculum was the collab- 
orative work of Ruthanne Andcrson, Amy 
Behm, Sarah Carl, Ieter C(asc, Sarah Case, 
(Casey (Clementson, Susan I)cdon, Vy 
I)uong, Adrienne English, Kelly Feltz, Arah 
I:ogcl, (:onrad Irclichkowski, I)an Fretland, 
Jeff Fulton, Cynthia (arner, Shannon (;ib- 
son, Emily (ustafson, imily Johnson, )rcw 
Kunkcl, 
I ana Lee, Jeff I cvinc, 
Andy 
Schmidt, l)ouglas 'l'hompson, ''im Thun- 
borg, John Van[Dyk, 'I'raci Youngs, and 
their instructors, Claire Mc(Coy and Marge 
Maddux. ? 
1 From Edith Sitwell, Facade and Other Poems, 1920-1935. London: Duckworth, 1950. 
Use to order any MENC resources mentioned in this issue of MEJor any other MENC books, videos, or awareness items. 
Stock# 
Description 
Quantity Nonmember 
Price 
Member 
Price 
Amount 
Membership 
#: 
exp. date 
PAYMENT: 
Orders under $50 must include payment. 
1. 
[ 
Check 
enclosed 
(payable 
to MENC) 
2. ii Charge 
to ($10 minimum): Z Visa 
l Masl 
Card no. 
Shipping 
Fees 
terCard 
Exp. date 
c,: _ z. .... 
Order Subtotal 
Fee 
Under $10.00 .......................... $2.00 
$10.00-$24.99 ........................ $3.00 
$25.00-$49.99 ........................ $4.00 
$50.00-$99.99 ....................... $5.00 
n ,.. ,t nn nn 
ro, ^f 
Subtotal $ 
VA residents 
add 4.5% 
tax 
$ 
Shipping 
Fee 
$ 
TOTAL $ 
bigyiIduU 
oUVreI 
b I UU.UU 
.00 
. 
.'... 
.o 
Prices are subject to change without notice 
subtotal 
No returns will be accepted unless order was damaged or 
3. LJ Bill us: $50 minimum. 
Institutional 
purchase 
order required. 
iricorrectly 
filled 
, r^ .i ~ ~ ~ 
~~~~~ 
1 1 
iin> 
i- 
n r\ i 
i- 
.r 
i. 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Allow 
4-6 weeks for delivery 
Provide member's 
name and I.D. number on P.O. for member discount. 
For nformawtion 
on quantity 
discounts 
call 1-800-828-0229 
SHIP TO: 
Credit card holders 
Address 
SEND ORDER 
TO: 
may call toll-free, 
MENC 
Publications 
Sales 
1-800-828-0229 
City 
Cit|~~~~~~~~~ 
y ~1806 
Robert Fulton Drive 
or fax toll-free 
State, 
zip 
Reston, 
VA 20191-4348 
1-888-275-MENC 
Daytime 
phone 
($10 minimum 
charge 
order). M82 
L_________----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
MUSIC 
EDUCATORS 
JOURNAL 
44 
