A Special Topic Class in Chemistry on Feminism and Science as a
Tool to Disrupt the Dysconcious Racism in STEM
Michelle Anne C. Reyes,* Jonathan Hall, Yasmene H. Odeh, Aied Garcia, Amy Benton, Anna Moffett,
Dennis McCunney, Diya Bose, and Sambuddha Banerjee*
Cite This: J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 112−117
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: This article presents an argument on the importance of teaching
science with a feminist framework and defines it by acknowledging that all
knowledge is historically situated and is influenced by social power and politics.
This article presents a pedagogical model for implementing a special topic class
on science and feminism for chemistry students at East Carolina University, a
rural serving university in North Carolina. We provide the context of developing
this class, a curricular model that is presently used (including reading lists,
assignments, and student learning outcomes), and qualitative data analysis from
online student surveys. The student survey data analysis shows curiosity about
the applicability of feminism in science and the development of critical race and
gender consciousness and their interaction with science. We present this work as
an example of a transformative pedagogical model to dismantle White
supremacy in Chemistry.
KEYWORDS: STEM Curriculum, Feminist Science and Technology Studies, Dysconcious Racism, DEI in STEM
■ INTRODUCTION
We begin this article with a quote from the student opinion on
instruction (SOIS) received by one of the coauthors (SB) from
their biochemistry lecture class:
“I also feel that in such a scientific class that has nothing to do
with gender or the LGBTQ community, the Professor’s personal
beliefs should have been kept to himself or discussed outside of class
rather than in front of everyone in the middle of class. A student
answered a question about a disease that affects more XY (males)
than XX (females) by stating “male” and “female” in her answer.
This is a concept that is WIDELY taught in the BIOLOGY classes
at THIS SCHOOL. The student should not have been called out
in class and asked to change their answer because the un-offensive
words of “male” and “female” were triggering for the professor.
Especially since there are lots of people out there who genuinely
believe there are only two genders. Such a belief should not be
triggering nor offensive and definitely should not be debated in a
scientific class that has nothing to do with comments about gender
made by the professor.” Taken from the survey of student
opinion on instruction for SB’s biochemistry class.
This response that masks scientific ignorance (such as the
insistence on the strict sex/gender binary) with appeals to
scientific purity typifies the kind of criticism and hostility
instructors face when they try to use inclusive language in
STEM classes. When scientifically established facts, such as the
nonbinary nature of both sex and gender1−5 are seen by
students of science as a belief, one might ask: Are we being true
to scientific knowledge? We use this student comment as a
reflection of the subjectivity of how the pedagogical decisions
are made in teaching “true science” vs what existing scientific
knowledge tells us. This has resulted in the propagation of
scientific miseducation for generations.
Addressing the miseducation of teachers, two decades ago,
Joyce E. King wrote: “Critical, transformative teachers must
develop a pedagogy of social action and advocacy that really
celebrates diversity, not just random holidays, isolated cultural
artefacts, or ‘festivals and food’”.6 While explaining how
miseducation of teachers is done, King introduced a new term,
dysconscious racism, defined as an acceptance of dominant
White norms and privileges arising from the uncritical habit of
the mind leading to the maintenance of the status quo. In
contrast to unconscious bias7 which has been quoted as
involuntary and used in the academy often, King’s idea of
dysconcious racism demands a critical analysis of the history of
systemic discrimination in the institutions and coming up with
effective interventions.6 Although such critical thinking can be
inbuilt in the social sciences, even today, future STEM
educators seldom get any disciplinary training on the
relationship between history, politics, and science. The
Received:
April 14, 2022
Revised:
September 24, 2022
Published: November 14, 2022
Article
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
© 2022 American Chemical Society and
Division of Chemical Education, Inc.
112
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.2c00293
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 112−117
Downloaded via DUKE UNIV on February 18, 2024 at 00:16:50 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.
importance of inclusion and development of STEM identity for
students from socially discriminated communities have been
felt and discussed in Chemistry Literature;8 however, we found
only one recent work outlining a pedagogical model/
curriculum developed by STEM departments to disrupt
dysconcious racism in STEM.9 The effect of this dysconcious
racism might explain the lower retention of URM and LGBT
students in STEM, as STEM has very often heavily invested in
the numerical diversity aspect through hiring of staff/faculty
and recruitment of students while not focusing on the support
part.10,11
In this article we describe the development, implementation,
and student experience from a special topic course in
chemistry, Science and Feminism, as a disruptive tool to
challenge the status quo in Chemistry. Using Critical Race
Theory and intersectional feminism as the framework,12,13 this
course aimed at creating an intellectual as well as physical
space for STEM students at East Carolina University (ECU)
where they could explore their identities and how these
intersect with the knowledge base and the pedagogy of science
by looking at these from historical, political, and feminist lens.
The other aim was to shine light, through this process, how
scientific epistemology and culture have strong links with
capitalism, enslavement, colonization, and exploitation of
female-bodied folks. We provide the historical context of
teaching this class in our institution, development of the course
syllabus, assignments, and evaluations adopted for this course
over the past two years as a template for future course
development. In the Discussion and Conclusion section, we
also provide a short description from qualitative analysis of
online student surveys to understand what students thought
about the importance of such a STEM course. Finally, this
course is intended to produce an affirming space that will allow
minoritized students to enter a chemistry class without having
to leave their identities at the metaphorical and physical door
of STEM classes.
■ SOCIAL LOCATION OF THE AUTHORS AND THEIR
RELATION TO THIS COURSE
M.A.R. participated in the special topic chemistry class in
Spring 2021 as a biology graduate student. She is a young adult
Filipino cis woman who was raised in a middle-class rural town
in North Carolina for most of her childhood by immigrant
parents.
D.M. consulted on the design and delivery of the course as
well as the preparation of this manuscript. He is a middle-aged
White cis-gendered man who was raised in a suburban
Philadelphia family with a diverse set of adopted and foster
siblings. He approaches this work largely trained in a Jesuit
social ethics tradition and currently serves as a student affairs
educator responsible for community engagement, leadership,
and DEI experiential programming.
S.B. designed and taught this class as a special topic in
chemistry class in Spring 2021 and then in Spring 2022. They
are a middle-aged Indian immigrant working in the US higher
education. They identify as gender nonconfirming and a
brown-immigrant-queer. They were raised in an upper caste
and middle-class, college educated family in an urban
environment in India and experiences and understands this
world from these complex vantage points. These social
locations of S.B. also influenced the texts and topics discussed
in this course which centered around the historical relationship
of Black and Brown and colonized people with modern STEM
discipline.
The instructor S.B. collaborated with a few students who
had taken the class already (M.R.: She/her, J.H.: He/him, A.B.:
She/her, A.G.: She/her, and A.M.: She/her). S.B. also
consulted D.B. (She/her), D.M. (He/him), and Y.O. (She/
her) during the development of the course with regards to the
framework and content and then preparation of this manu-
script.
■ THE CONTEXT OF INTRODUCTION OF THIS
COURSE, COURSE OBJECTIVE, AND LEARNING
OUTCOME
As one of the main emphases of this course was to understand
the historical context of knowledge production and its
relationship with power and politics, it is imperative to
acknowledge the historical and political context in which this
course was developed and offered. Following the murder of
George Floyd there was nationwide galvanization of existing
and new antiracism groups in the academy. At East Carolina
University, several task forces were created to assess our roles
in institutional racism and anti-Blackness as well as to re-
evaluate academic practices. That same year, the Chemistry
Department posted an antiracism statement on its Web site,
which stated: “...That means we, as a department, must
continually self-reflect and ask hard questions of ourselves. Do
our pedagogy, assignments, exams, and grading practices help
everyone to succeed?” (The link to the full statement is in the
Supporting Information). Although from individual and some
institutional levels there were efforts to have intentional
conversations on anti-Blackness and the academy before, the
collective efforts to make tangible institutional and pedagogical
changes gained momentum after this murder. To meet the
promise made in the antiracism statement cited above, this
special topic class (Chem 5527) was created and offered to all
undergraduate and graduate students in STEM. The course did
not require any pre- or corequisite on feminist theorizing,
making it accessible to STEM students who often do not get
the opportunity to take these courses. The intention was to
create a space where students will be introduced to various
ideas of feminism and then read, evaluate, and make
recommendations to make STEM more equitable as their
final assignment. It was offered for the first time in the Spring
of 2021, and it was cross listed as the capstone course for
Gender Studies minor students at ECU. Table 1 provides
information on enrollment in this course the two times it has
been offered since the spring of 2021. This, however, required
starting the coursework by developing a feminist framework
and knowledge about the feminist movements across the world
and their impact in the knowledge production in STEM (Table
1). The course required active participation from students with
Table 1. Enrollment in the Science and Feminism Class
(2021−2022)
Term
Number
of STEM
students
Number of
gender studies
minor students
Number of
graduate
students
Number of
students who took
part in the study
Spring
2021
7
7
2
4
Spring
2022
6
0
0
N/Aa
aThe class was still in progress when this article was written.
Journal of Chemical Education
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.2c00293
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 112−117
113
on- and off-line discussions and reading scientific journal
articles and book chapters as recommended by the instructor.
As preparation for the developing of this course, the
instructor asked the following questions: What institutional
efforts have been in place to educate and make ALL STEM
students aware of issues of gender and race? How do we
facilitate a conversation on race, gender, and sexuality in
STEM with overlapping identities and backgrounds of both
educators and students? Are we teaching, as a chemistry
pedagogical approach, what questions in STEM are considered
worthy of investigation and what influences this worthiness?
As an example, the American Chemical Society while
explaining the structure and aims for standard chemistry
curriculum as, “(t) o ensure that key skills and knowledge are
addressed” and “(c) ourses should be taught in a challenging,
engaging, and inclusive manner that accommodates a variety of
learning styles”,14 it does not list any disciplinary training on
DEI.
As will be described, the special topic in chemistry class
presented in this article was named Science and Feminism,
instead of Diversity in science based on the critique of the
performativeness of diversity work presented by Ahmed in her
work as well as the definition of feminism given by hooks.15,16
We must add here that although Feminist science and
technology studies (FSTS) authors17,18 have long engaged
with the question whether science can be done as a feminist
practice by including a critical and transformative curriculum
breaking away from the binary between science and society,
chemistry degree accreditation agencies, like ACS, still do not
recommend a chemistry class on DEI in the list of
recommended classes.19 The lack of such a disciplinary class
recommendation on the history and politics of science
epistemology and DEI might wrongly perpetuate the absolute
objectivity of science and scientists, where the latter have this
nearly mystic ability to transcend their embodied biases and
create disembodied and “pure” knowledge unaffected by the
society and politics.18 This false perception of purity might
force students from minoritized communities in STEM to
choose between the history of their communities’ relation with
science knowledge production and their experience in science
class. This ahistorical and apolitical positioning of STEM
knowledge and practice has been critiqued by FSTS scholars,18
who argue that any knowledge is historically situated and is
shaped by the power of politics. Omission of the history and
politics behind scientific knowledge and culture production
perpetuates a set of uncritical scientific practices which not
only contributes to dysconcious racism but also maintains the
status quo. Such uncritical and apolitical position of science
leads to claims like Black Americans contracting Covid-19 at a
higher rate, making it a phenotypic claim in both scientific and
popular imagination rather than writing about how the
historical relation of Black Americans with the American
medical system, their access to the medical service, and the
socioeconomic conditions has contributed to this epidemio-
logical data.20 On the other hand, a few works tackled these
issues by critical engaging with the history and politics of
American medicine with Black Americans rather than making
it sound like a phenotypic issue.21−23
Based on these, the objective of this special topic course was
to interrogate scientific objectivity, scientific history, scientific
philosophy, and socializing in science using feminist lens. It is
very important to add here that this class was not intended to
create new feminist scholarship but rather shine the light of
feminism on science as an enterprise. An overarching theme/
learning objective form feminist science is to recognize that all
knowledge is historically situated and is influenced by power and
politics.18 This overarching objective was divided into the
following learning objectives:
Table 2. Texts and Unit Questions Used in Science and Feminism Class
Unit
Text Used
Unit Questions
Learning outcomes
Unit 1: Not
Just the Jar-
gon
Feminism is for everybody: b. Hooks
A. Scientific objectivity. Is universal objectivity a
feminist idea? Objectivity and the Four “Waves” of
Feminism
Students will develop a critical
feminist consciousness. They
will be able to differentiate
between different feminist
ideologies and their relevance
to STEM
(Chapters 1, 8, 10) Teaching to transgress. Education as the
practice of freedom: b. Hooks
B. Using existing feminist ideologies, devising our own
Feminist lens to look at the STEM disciplines/
contents/evaluations
(Chapters 8, 11, 12) On being included Racism and diversity in
institutional life: S. Ahmed
C. What is diversity? What is inclusion? Going from
the individual to the system, bias to -isms. Biased
and unbiased in science and society
(Chapter 2) Ghost Story for Darwin: B. Subramaniam
(Introduction) Unit debate topic: Science done by a feminist
and feminist practice in science are the same thing
Unit 2: Who is
science for?
Who is the
primary
benefactor
of science?
Death of nature. Women, ecology, and scientific revolution: C.
Merchant
A. The eugenic project
Students should be able to
recognize how scientific
questions are politically and
historically motivated and
apply this understanding to
current scientific efforts
(Chapter 6) Medical Apartheid: The dark history of medical
examination on black Americans from colonial times to the
present: H. A. Washington
B. Perfecting C-section
(Chapters 1, 4, 13) Unit Debate topic: Health care providers
(Doctors, dentists, nurses, PA, PT, and administrators)
should be required to learn the history of medical racism,
sexism, and homo/transphobia and its legacy as part of their
licensing process and it should be an ongoing training than a
onetime one.
C. Social Darwinism: Facts and myths about evolution
D. Tuskegee airmen case
E. Whose consent matters in science? The legacy of
HeLa immortal cells
F. The story of DNA structure: Rosalind Franklin
Unit 3: Quan-
tum futur-
ism with an
emphasis on
Black Quan-
tum futur-
ism
Meeting the universe halfway: K. Barad
A. The Schrodinger’s Cat paradox: In this section we
will investigate if science is objective or subjective
Students should be able to
identify the interdependence
of scientific knowledge with
popular culture and move-
ments
(Chapter 1) Unit Debate topic: “The past is never dead, it is not
even past”
B. Randomness and its connection to forbidden
territory: In this section we will try to explore the
connection between the individual and the
collective in a biased and unbiased framework and
then interrogate if we can do the same with our
society to evaluate its biases.
Journal of Chemical Education
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.2c00293
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 112−117
114
• Recognize the salient characters of different social justice
movements/feminist movements and how these influ-
enced the STEM culture
• Understand the definitions of keywords (like institu-
tional racism, DEI work etc., different gender expression
terms) and be able to analyze lived experiences from
these learnings
• Compare and critique different ways social structures
have contributed to the way STEM is taught and
practiced since the Industrial revolution
• Plan intersectional intervention to existing methods of
STEM teaching/research/workplace scenario
■ BRIEF OUTLINE OF THE MATERIALS COVERED IN
THIS COURSE
In this section, we will briefly describe the reading assignments
for this course which was divided into four sections. We will
also provide an explanation to why these readings were chosen.
We encourage readers to visit the class Web site for more
details and some of the debate recordings published with
student consent.
Unit 1 readings (Table 2) focused on introducing students
to the history of American feminism and its contribution/effect
as felt in STEM epistemology. This unit also comprised of
readings that critically looked at the DEI work in the Academy
and its connection complicatedness dysconcious racism. As
experiential learning, this unit also invited students to think
and talk about their individual relationship with the word
feminism, STEM culture, and their own identities. The end of
the unit assignments was writing a reflection from all the
readings and participation in a debate with the topic: Science
done by a feminist and feminist practice in science are the
same thing.
Unit 2 included readings (Table 2) that exposed students to
the historical context of pathologizing the pregnant womb and
the construction of gynecology as a White male discipline
while utilizing Black and Indigenous bodies as experimental
subjects. We further explored the development of (Black,
Indigenous, and Brown) races as inferior and pathological
throughout the development of modern science. As experi-
ential learning, students participated in discussions on their
interaction with the medical system as immigrants, women,
women of color, and LGBTQIA2S+ individuals. The end of
the unit assignments was writing a reflection from all the
readings and participation in a debate with the topic: Health
care providers (doctors, dentists, nurses, PA, PT, and
administrators) should be required to learn the history of
medical racism, sexism, and homo/transphobia and their
legacy as part of their licensing process, and it should be an
ongoing training than a onetime one. Students were also
suggested to watch the 2017 movie, The Immortal life of
Henrietta Lacks.
Unit 3 explored the development and interrelationship
between quantum mechanics, Marxist materialism, Afro-
futurism/pessimism, and postcolonial nationalism. To prob-
lematize time as a linear social construct, the Copenhagen
interpretation of the collapse of wave-particle duality was
utilized. The end of the unit assignments was writing a
reflection from all the readings and participation in a debate
with the topic: past is never dead, it is not even past. The
students also had the option of watching the 2020 movie,
Antebellum. However, the instructor was flexible on this
assignment as some of the African American students did not
want to watch it and be triggered. They wrote a reflection on a
book on race and gender that they had read.
Unit 4 consisted of reading articles in STEM that used
identity (racial/gender/sexuality) as empirical parameters and
how that can further propagate the absoluteness of these
categories rather than dismantling these constructed realities.
The end of the unit assignments was writing a reflection from
all the readings and participation. There was no debate for this
unit as this was close to the semester end.
■ ASSIGNMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS
Being a course on how to create a nonhierarchical feminism
learning environment in a STEM classroom, the assignments
and evaluations for this class consisted of in-class debate,
discussion, and writing reflection essays at the end of each
chapter, instead of administering high-stake tests.24 The end of
the semester final evaluation consisted of writing a
comprehensive essay where students were asked to write
intervention plans that can encourage a feminist learning
environment in ECU STEM departments and the development
of individual Spark page and/or a Podcast using Adobe
products that are available for free to all ECU students.
One important aspect that was kept in mind while designing
assignments for this class was the complexity and multifaceted
of the ideas taught. To emphasize this broadness of
applicability of the ideas, different modes of interaction with
the content was implemented, for example, reading book
chapters, watching movies, critiquing STEM DEI artwork, etc.
Two of their assignments involved watching two movies, The
Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks and Antebellum for units 2 and
3, respectively, followed by class discussions on the relevance
and learning from these artistic expressions. As the content of
the movies are extremely triggering, students were given the
opportunity of not witness visual depiction of racism and
sexual violence, and in those cases, the instructor and the
individual student sat down to discuss an alternative, less
triggering, but related assignment. At the end of each unit
students also participated in a debate, and the topics for debate
were agreed upon from the class discussions. The final
assignment was a full paper with an intervention plan that
might be implemented in their own institution/department
which will enable students to create a STEM identity which
acknowledges and respects their personal identity. For 2021
and 2022 classes, the intervention topics that students wrote
about were as follows: the importance of all-gender bathrooms
in STEM buildings, the importance of teaching how race,
gender, sexuality, etc. are created and pathologized by STEM
as a medical college course, how to increase accessibility of
STEM as a discipline without erasing the lived experiences of
URM students, and how the American STEM identity can
incorporate the immigrant student/scholar experience.
Evaluation of these assignments was challenging for the
instructor, who has been indoctrinated in the race/gender
neutral position of STEM assignments. The reconciliation was
made by emphasizing that science is done and is for human
experiences, and thus, embodied experiences are scientifically
valid. To navigate the binary of the instructor as all-knowing
(sage on the stage) and the students as empty slates, often the
instructor would do the same assignment as the students and
their response will be critiqued in class.
Journal of Chemical Education
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.2c00293
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 112−117
115
■ DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We open our discussion by providing the analysis of the online
student survey responses. (For the method and excerpts from
student survey answers, see the Supporting Information. The
survey questions are included in the Appendix.) The survey
was administered to two groups of students; the first group had
already taken this class and were introduced to ideas like
systemic oppression, hegemony, assimilative feminism, etc.
The second group of students who took the survey had not
taken the class at the time of the survey; however, one of the
students from this group took the class in a future semester.
Analysis of the survey from students who took this class
appreciated that the historical situatedness of knowledge and
knowledge production and could explain the benefits that
those can provide to one’s professional success as well as the
society at large. This being the overarching learning objective
for this class, the authors argue that students gained the ability
to analyze information presented to them and express those
using both scientific and feminist language. Although both sets
of student survey responses showed clear interest and support
for a class on feminism in STEM, it is noted that students who
had taken the course had double the response length of those
who had not taken the course. Students who had taken the
class already prioritized explaining that there was a need rather
than just a desire for this type of education in STEM and the
reaped benefits of understanding feminist theories in relation
to STEM would progress them not only as students but as
future professionals outside of their institutions. These
students indicated that although this class was taught as a
chemistry special topic course, it would benefit anyone in
STEM. A student taking classes in the social science
departments can learn about racial consciousness, DEI, and
feminism in the context of society, but may have no discussion
on how these social constructs creates the scientific language
and the way of doing science. These surveys added that the
ability to host this discussion within STEM puts science
knowledge and practice in the context of society, its history,
and politics. Introspective analysis of the benefits of the course
for students who had not taken this course but participated in
the survey came from their own personal desire to understand
the intersectionality of differing cultures and how that would
apply this knowledge for future jobs or positions they may
hold. Among these two groups of students there is an
agreeance that the benefits of this course in the field of
academia as well as their proposed professional career support
its importance in our intuition. The conscious perspective
students gain from this course helps them propel their
understanding of the unspoken innerworkings of institutional
racism, hidden history, and much more, which in turn will
propel their growth as an adult and a professional. To
conclude, we return to the student comment which appeared
at the start this article. Instead of seeing the student comment
as a single deviation, as STEM practitioners, we must
understand our contributions in creating such ideas. These
ideas are products of systemic miseducation that allows the
weaponization of unscientific facts as true science. This process
is used by educators and scientists when they choose to use
gendered and racialized language in their profession. As a
queer student themselves, S.B. often did not have the tools or
language to challenge dysconcious racism in class. Through
this course, we tried to break that circle of violence and
helpless silence for future STEM practitioners. The authors are
aware that any one chemistry class taught in one university
cannot bring (STEM) cultural transformation. Social changes
are painfully slow even when there is a large number of bodies
making collective and intentional efforts. Knowing the scope
was limited, S.B. collaborated with Students’ Affairs at ECU
(through participation from D.M.) and learning from social
scientists from William & Mary (through participation from
D.B.). Prioritizing students as authors’ voices enriched this
paper writing experience by shining light on faculty’s
unintentional but ingrained desire to perpetuate a power
hierarchy, installed in them through their own academic
upbringing. So, through this process of writing, we experienced
breaking the circle of violence and silence firsthand. Further,
we wrote this article to share the pedagogical model and
curriculum with the entire Chemistry Academic Community,
should they want to join in the effort of fighting dysconcious
racism and miseducation. Finally, we hope that chemistry
socializing and education moves away from the deficit model,
tieing failing a chemistry class to phenotype.24
■ APPENDIX: SURVEY QUESTIONS
1. How/if did this class provided you with a social context of
science?
2. Did this course provide you with a better understanding
of DEI terms in the context of science?
3. Do you see any merit in having similar courses in other
universities?
4. How/if did this course prepare you for being a more
responsible professional working in a diverse environment?
■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available at https://pubs.ac-
s.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jchemed.2c00293.
Word frequency analysis (XLSX)
ECU Chemistry Pledge Against Racism full statement,
survey questions, method for survey analysis, excerpts
from student survey answers (PDF, DOCX)
■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Michelle Anne C. Reyes − Department of Biology, East
Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina 27834,
United States; Email: reyesm15@students.ecu.edu
Sambuddha Banerjee − Department of Chemistry, East
Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina 27858,
United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-4810-9561;
Email: banerjees17@ecu.edu
Authors
Jonathan Hall − Department of Chemistry, East Carolina
University, Greenville, North Carolina 27858, United States
Yasmene H. Odeh − Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina
University, Greenville, North Carolina 27834, United States
Aied Garcia − Department of Biology, East Carolina
University, Greenville, North Carolina 27834, United States
Amy Benton − Wayne Community College, Department of
Science, Goldsboro, North Carolina 27534, United States
Anna Moffett − East Carolina University, Department of
Neuroscience, Greenville, North Carolina 27834, United
States
Journal of Chemical Education
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.2c00293
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 112−117
116
Dennis McCunney − Intercultural Affairs, East Carolina
University, Greenville, North Carolina 27834, United States
Diya Bose − William and Mary, Department of Sociology,
Williamsburg, Virginia 23185, United States
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.2c00293
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge that this article was conceived,
researched, and written on Indigenous land and “We
acknowledge the Tuscarora people, who are the traditional
custodians of the land on which we work and live, and
recognize their continuing connection to the land, water, and
air that Greenville consumes. We pay respect to the eight state-
recognized tribes of North Carolina; Coharie, Eastern Band of
Cherokee, Haliwa-Saponi, Lumbee, Meherrin, Occaneechi
Band of Saponi, Sappony, and Waccamaw-Siouan, all Nations,
and their elders past, present, and emerging”. We thank the
Chemistry Department, East Carolina University for support.
S.B. is thankful to Dr. Banu Subramanian, Dr. Marsan, and Dr.
Peralta for their support and constructive criticisms in
developing this course and this article.
■ 