Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10643-022-01347-w
A Mixed Methods Study of the Relationship Between Individualized 
Lesson Planning and Social‑Emotional Outcomes in Young Children
Michael J. Haslip1  · Neisha Terry1
Accepted: 5 April 2022 / Published online: 7 May 2022 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2022
Abstract
This mixed methods study examines the relationship between different components and characteristics of individualized 
lesson plans and children’s social-emotional outcomes to develop a profile of effective planning. Sixty-one individualized 
SEL lesson plans written and implemented by 20 experienced early childhood educators from a large city in the northeastern 
United States are examined to understand the types and difficulty level of behavioral challenges teachers addressed, the types 
and specificity of SEL skills taught and the specificity of teaching strategies implemented. By quantizing qualitative data 
through a process of descriptive, pattern and then magnitude coding, the study then uses correlational analyses to examine 
the relationship between successful child outcomes following instruction and the rated components of the lesson plans. 
Findings reveal that lesson plan alignment is most strongly related to successful social-emotional outcomes (rho coefficient 
.69), followed by teaching strategy specificity (rho .51). The difficulty level of the children’s behavior being addressed by the 
lesson plans and the teachers’ ability to list SEL skills with specificity as learning objectives were not significantly related 
to later student success. Assigning individualized SEL lesson planning to in-service teachers resulted in at least partially 
successful child outcomes 59% of the time, showcasing how teachers need more systematic practice and training to refine 
this important skill.
Keywords Early childhood education · Social emotional learning · Lesson plan · Individualized instruction · 
Differentiation · Professional development
Introduction
Social emotional learning (SEL) competencies are best fos-
tered by teachers who understand how to design lessons that 
provide explicit opportunities for students to be introduced 
to and practice these skills (Egert et al., 2018; Masterson, 
2021; McClelland et al., 2017). Benson (2021) argues that 
SEL-focused lesson plans engage students more, making 
them more amenable to the development of these compe-
tencies. Effective lesson planning for SEL also contributes 
to better classroom management, leading to greater learning 
gains (Sandilos et al., 2020).
McClelland et al. (2017) state that “effective interven-
tions embed direct instruction and practice of targeted [SEL] 
skills into daily activities” (p. 33). Therefore, to support SEL 
competencies in the early years, teachers need  to develop 
proficiency crafting and delivering SEL plans. However, the 
capacity of early childhood educators to write lessons aimed 
at developing SEL competencies appears so understudied 
that no empirical examples could be found for review. There 
remains disparity in the level and nature of teacher prepared-
ness in early childhood (Boyd et al., 2020; Burchinal et al., 
2002). While some teachers have been trained in lesson 
design at accredited teacher education programs, others are 
new to the field and have a rudimentary understanding of 
writing lesson plans (Ackerman, 2004; Marais et al., 2019; 
McClelland et al., 2017).
SEL programs, curricula, lesson plan templates and 
related resources are readily available for early childhood 
 * Michael J. Haslip 
 
Haslip@drexel.edu
 
Neisha Terry 
 
Nty23@drexel.edu
1 
School of Education, Drexel University, 3rd Floor, Office: 
3225, 401 Market St, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
876
 
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888
1 3
teachers, such as the Head Start Effective Practice Guides,1 
the HighScope Preschool Curriculum for Social and Emo-
tional Development (Epstein, 2012), the SecondStep Early 
Learning Curriculum,2 Al’s Pals,3 Incredible Years,4 Tools 
of the Mind5 and 70 other programs described on the 
CASEL Program Guide.6 However, as research indicates, 
lessons are more effective when they are designed from a 
place of contextual knowledge (Ladson-Billings, 2002). The 
most effective lessons  are those that can leverage knowledge 
of the learner, the learning context, and the community to 
select appropriate strategies and learning activities (Ladson-
Billings, 2002; Paris & Alim, 2017). Prepackaged curricula 
may not be as effective as lessons designed by teachers 
themselves for a specific classroom context or individual 
child. Yet the ideal of individualized, teacher created SEL 
lesson plans in early childhood is elusive, in part because 
there appears to be no published empirical research on this 
topic.
Some early childhood educators admit to having limited 
knowledge of social emotional learning characteristics (Esen-
Augyen & Shain-Taskin, 2017). While they have heard the 
term used, many of them are unfamiliar with the competen-
cies or indicators associated with each SEL skill. Addition-
ally, research reveals an overall lack of teacher proficiency in 
lesson design at the early childhood level, connecting back 
to inadequate lesson plan training in teacher preparation 
programs (Marais et al., 2019), as well as inadequate train-
ing from subsequent professional development (McClelland 
et al., 2017; Sandilos et al., 2020). In fact, when examining 
the issue of SEL competency and teacher delivery of these 
skills, researchers report that “early childhood educators often 
feel that they don’t receive enough  training to effectively help 
children develop SEL skills” (McClelland et al., 2017, p. 34).
This need for more effective professional development 
aimed at equipping teachers with pedagogical tools to pro-
vide instruction in SEL led to a recent study by Sandilos 
et al. (2020) exploring how professional development based 
on pre-written SEL learning curricula for Pre-K class-
rooms might effect teacher-student interactions and teacher 
effectiveness. Despite the focus on curricula and delivery 
of SEL objectives, the  researchers did not explore lesson 
planning, or assess teachers’ ability to plan SEL lessons and 
instructional opportunities. The programs that they explored 
featured lessons that had already been planned for teachers. 
Early childhood teacher proficiency in SEL lesson planning 
remains unexplored. Other researchers have examined early 
childhood teachers' perceptions of the adequacy of their pro-
fessional development in SEL with results indicating that 
more training is needed (Aparo, 2021; Ferreira et al., 2021). 
These studies have not focused on SEL lesson planning.
SEL competencies are appropriate targets for planning 
and instruction, including those related to emotion regula-
tion, decision-making, conflict resolution, cooperative play, 
and many others (Epstein, 2009). These skills are developed 
along a progression, with learners in the early years being 
introduced to the skills in a way that  best suits their devel-
opmental ability and cultural context (Mondi et al., 2021; 
Yoder, 2014). Furthermore, teachers must understand many 
different developmental milestones and the need for a cul-
turally relevant lens when assessing them (McCarthy et al., 
2006; Mondi et al., 2021). Teachers of children ages 3–5 
and ages 6–8 often address different developmental targets 
(Darling-Hammond et al., 2020). Likewise, students in urban 
and rural areas, as well as students from disparate ethnic 
or racial backgrounds, develop differing cultural norms and 
practices that must be considered when planning and assess-
ing SEL development in the early years (Ladson-Billings, 
1995; Webb-Johnson, 2002). Identifying the appropriate 
response to developmental, cultural and economic diversity 
in children is a skill that must be developed within teachers, 
including  the ability to discern the appropriate SEL skill 
for instruction within this context, and the ability to provide 
proper cultural and linguistic scaffolding during instruction. 
Can teachers adequately develop or employ these skills of 
discernment and cultural competence if only utilizing pre-
developed lesson plans?
Most SEL lesson plans are written for whole-group or 
small group instruction in collaborative classroom settings 
(VanAusdal, 2019). The rationale behind this emphasis on 
group instruction is due to the highly social nature of the 
skill sets being targeted for development, with many pre-
developed lessons featuring activities such as role-play, 
games, and other group activities (White et al., 2017). This 
group lesson plan emphasis reveals another knowledge gap, 
as there is a paucity of empirical data on the nature and 
effectiveness of individualized SEL plans in early childhood 
classrooms.
Though researchers agree that “the result of appropri-
ately individualized instruction is meaningful learning for 
all young children” (Boat et al., 2010, p. 3), individual-
ized instruction is typically reserved for students  requiring 
special education services (Boat et al., 2010; Smith et al., 
2 SecondStep Early Learning Program. Online: https:// www. secon 
dstep. org/ early- learn ing- curri culum
3 TeachingStrategies, Al’s Pals. Online: https:// teach ingst rateg ies. 
com/ produ ct/ als- pals/
4 The Incredible Years training series. Online: https:// incre dible years. 
com/
5 Tools of the Mind. Online: https:// tools ofthe mind. org/ get- tools/
6 Collaborative for Social, Emotional and Academic Learning 
(CASEL), Program Guide. Online: https:// pg. casel. org/ review- progr 
ams/
1 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration 
for Children and Families, Early Childhood Learning & Knowledge 
Center (ECLKC), Effective Practice Guides, Social and Emotional 
Development. Online: https:// eclkc. ohs. acf. hhs. gov/ school- readi ness/ 
effec tive- pract ice- guides/ social- emoti onal- devel opment
877
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888 
1 3
2018). It is therefore important to examine ECE teachers’ 
self-efficacy with creating SEL lesson plans and individual-
izing SEL guidance. “Individualized guidance” is thought 
to be more effective at teaching children social competence 
skills compared to whole class lessons (Katz & McClel-
lan, 1997) because it “maximizes the child’s participation in 
constructing new knowledge and allows teachers to be warm 
and supportive during the interaction” (Epstein, 2009, p. 18).
Although there are teaching guides for supporting dif-
ferentiation across content areas in the early grades (Smutny 
& von Fremd, 2009) and frameworks for modifying early 
childhood curriculum for individualization (Horn & Baner-
jee, 2009), qualitative research suggests that teachers in 
the early elementary grades “struggle to develop effective 
individual learning plans” in practice (Muñoz-Martínez & 
Porter, 2020, p. 1), making it likely to  find similar struggles 
at the preschool level. In the United States, the ECE profes-
sion recognizes the importance of providing differentiated 
and individualized instruction for all young children across 
all developmental domains (Masterson, 2021; NAEYC, 
2019), yet there appears to be no empirical research about 
how early childhood teachers engage in individualized les-
son planning for social-emotional learning or how successful 
they are when doing so.
Purpose
The purpose of this study was to determine if teachers report 
improved social-emotional outcomes in young children 
after writing and implementing individualized SEL lesson 
plans, and if so, to what extent, how, and why. The study 
investigated how early childhood teachers engage in indi-
vidualized SEL lesson planning by examining the types of 
behavioral challenges they target for improvement, the types 
of SEL skills they identify as learning objectives, the speci-
ficity of teaching strategies used, the degree of alignment 
across these components, and the level of social-emotional 
improvement children experience after instruction accord-
ing to teachers.
Conceptual Framework
This study is grounded in three conceptual perspectives, 
(1) The Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional 
Learning (CASEL) framework, (2) Knowles’s (1984) adult 
learning theory, and (3) individualized instruction and les-
son planning (Kapfer, 1975; Masterson, 2021). The CASEL 
framework is composed of five core SEL competencies: self-
awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship 
skills and responsible decision-making (CASEL, 2021). 
Knowles’s adult learning theory presents four principles 
that informed how professional development was provided 
to the teachers in this study: (1) adults are most interested in 
learning about subjects closely related to their professional 
or personal lives, (2) adults learn best by solving problems 
encountered in their course of their work or life, (3) adult 
learning happens through experiences, (4) adults learn by 
reflecting on and evaluating their own teaching and learning. 
With regards to individualized instruction and lesson plan-
ning in preschool, Masterson (2021) writes:
Individualized means tailoring your choices, sup-
ports, and interactions to ensure the specific child can 
be successful and take pride in learning. It involves 
making practical adjustments to activities, time, 
materials, goals, and levels of support… Individual-
ized support is important for all preschool children. 
It involves keeping track of skills children can carry 
out independently and identifying skills that are still 
developing and need support. (p. 14)
Program Implemented
In 2017, the first author taught a non-credit bearing course 
in social-emotional learning to 24 in-service early childhood 
educators in a large city in the northeastern US. Educators 
earned 20 state approved PD hours for completing the course 
which was taught in a classroom in a local neighborhood 
community center. Participants attended class weekly for 12 
consecutive weeks. The course addressed the importance of 
SEL, strategies for creating positive teacher–child interac-
tions and a supportive environment, understanding and sup-
porting emotional development (e.g. empathy, competence, 
labeling emotions), social development (e.g. community, 
cooperative play, valuing diversity), moral development, 
being a role model for SEL, how to observe children’s char-
acter strengths, how to assess children’s SEL development, 
and other activities (Haslip et al., 2018).
Intervention
One important element of the SEL course was to prepare 
educators to provide individualized SEL instruction by 
practicing how to write and implement a simple lesson plan 
template for one young child (ages 2–6). This preparation 
involved educators reflecting on challenging behaviors, iden-
tifying SEL skills for development, writing action plans to 
support children’s SEL skill development, and later reflect-
ing on children’s improvement after coaching and instruc-
tion. The lesson plan writing, implementation, and reflection 
activity was treated primarily as a homework assignment 
for teachers as it relied on teachers to implement their plans 
with children while at work. An SEL lesson plan template 
was given to all teachers and explained (see instrumenta-
tion). Teachers were asked to write an individualized SEL 
lesson plan for one child who had no more than moderate 
878
 
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888
1 3
behavioral challenges. They were then asked to implement 
their plan for the child over the subsequent week(s), write 
about the child’s results and then submit the completed tem-
plate in a later class. They were invited to complete this 
cycle as frequently as they could to improve their individu-
alized SEL lesson planning skill and support their students. 
The course instructor/researcher did not help teachers write 
individualized lesson plans, although there was much dis-
cussion and material given to teachers about how to sup-
port SEL and related teaching tips provided throughout the 
course. The instructor also did not provide written feedback 
on submitted lesson plan templates.
Research Questions
1. What are the most frequently addressed behavioral chal-
lenges documented on young children’s individualized 
SEL lesson plans?
2. How difficult are the behavioral challenges addressed on 
young children’s individualized SEL lesson plans?
3. What SEL skills do early childhood educators target for 
instruction on individualized SEL lesson plans?
4. How specific are the SEL skills identified for instruction 
by early childhood educators on individualized lesson 
plans?
5. How specific are the teaching activities and strategies 
written on SEL lesson plans by early childhood educa-
tors?
6. How well-aligned is the content of individualized SEL 
lesson plans for young children?
7. How frequently do early childhood educators report suc-
cessful child outcomes following individualized SEL 
lesson planning and instruction?
8. Is there a statistically significant relationship between 
successful child SEL outcomes and various characteris-
tics of an individualized lesson plan, including:
o 
the difficulty level of the behavioral challenge that 
was addressed
p 
the specificity level of the SEL skill(s) that were 
identified for instruction
q 
the specificity level of the teaching strategies on the 
lesson plan
r 
the degree of alignment across each section of the 
lesson plan, including the nature of the behavioral 
challenge, the SEL skill(s) to be taught and the spe-
cific teaching activities on the lesson plan.
Methods
Participants
Participants were 20 in-service early childhood educators 
drawn from a class of 24 teachers completing a course in 
social-emotional learning for professional development. 
All 20 participants voluntarily completed the SEL lesson 
plan submission activity associated with the course, permit-
ting data collection for this study (four teachers chose not 
to submit lesson plans and were therefore excluded from 
this study). Table 1 reports characteristics of 19 participants, 
rather than 20, because one person did not put their name or 
study identification number onto the three SEL lesson plans 
they submitted. We are confident only one person submit-
ted unnamed lesson plans after handwriting analysis. All 19 
known participants were female (100%), and the majority 
were 40 or more years of age (63%), identified as Black/
African American (63%), had at least a bachelor’s degree 
(58%), six or more years of teaching experience (91.6%), 
worked full-time teaching children (74%) and taught more 
than one age group of children (e.g. 3–4 & 4–5) (89%). Par-
ticipants represented different work roles at the time of the 
study, including lead teacher, assistant teacher, early learn-
ing center director, at-home childcare provider, and coach. 
All participants worked in a large city in the northeastern 
United States.
Participants for the SEL course were recruited in three 
steps. First, the first author met with 10 local childcare direc-
tors to assess the need for SEL training and solicit topics of 
interest for content. Second, all 10 directors distributed a 
flyer with course registration information to their teachers. 
Third, the course flyer was also distributed to teachers and 
directors citywide using early childhood center list serves 
and through local professional development organizations. 
The study received institutional review board approval. 
Participants’ signed informed consent was obtained during 
course session one.
Data Collection and Instrumentation
Data were collected using a researcher-created template enti-
tled SEL Coaching Action Plan  (Appendix B), which was a 
one-page lesson plan template that contained five sequential 
sections for teachers to complete: (1) what is the repeating 
pattern of behavior that is a challenge of this child? (2) What 
does the child need to learn? What is the missing skill(s) that 
needs to be coached? (3) Describe how you plan to coach 
the child over the following week (what will you do and 
say; what will you coach the child to do and say; are there 
any cues you will establish with the child?). (4) How will 
you make sure the child practices the new skills? (5) After 
879
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888 
1 3
coaching reflection: What is the child doing now? What new 
skill(s) does the child seem to be practicing more frequently? 
What are the current results? These sections resemble a 
Personalized Learning Plan instructional process (Muñoz-
Martínez & Porter, 2020, p. 1562).
The template instructed teachers to choose one child who 
needed coaching to improve social interactions. The word 
“coaching” was used to indicate teaching a single child 
through individualized instruction and to differentiate this 
approach from small or whole group instruction. The first 
four sections of the template represented an individualized 
lesson plan. The fifth section was a reflection on results, 
to be completed 1–2 weeks after they were first written to 
give teachers that amount of time to implement the teaching 
strategies and time to coach the child to practice the targeted 
SEL skills identified on the lesson plan. Sixty-one valid tem-
plates were collected and analyzed for this study. Of these 61 
templates, six were missing the results data, leaving 55 fully 
completed. The children being coached were 2–6 years old, 
with most being 3–5 years old. Twenty teachers submitted 
between one and 10 SEL Coaching Action Plans, with an 
average of three per teacher. In many cases, teachers com-
pleted the lesson plan  during class on Wednesday evening, 
without help from the instructor, and then wrote the results 
a week or two later, submitting the complete template during 
that later class session.
Design
The general features of an exploratory sequential mixed 
methods (ESMM) design (Creswell and Creswell, 2017) 
were adapted by analyzing qualitative data first (in Phase 
1), then using that analysis to generate new quantitative vari-
ables (in Phase 2) and then quantitatively testing the rela-
tionships among these variables to answer related research 
questions (in Phase 3). This design uses quantitizing (Sand-
elowski et al., 2009) to convert qualitative data about lesson 
plans into quantitative form. Each of the three phases of this 
design are described in detail below.
Table 1  Participant Characteristics (n = 19)
Characteristic
n
(%)
Age at time of survey (years)
 25 or less
4
21
 26–32
2
10.5
 33–39
1
5
 40–46
2
10.5
 47–53
3
16
 54–60
5
26
 61–67
2
10.5
Gender
 Female
19
100
 Male
0
0
Race/Ethnicity
 Black or African American
12
63
 White
3
16
 Asian or Asian American
1
5
 Hispanic or Latino/a
2
10.5
 Other
1
5
Highest education level completed
 High school diploma/GED
2
10.5
 CDA or other certificate (not 2-year degree)
3
16
Associates degree
3
16
 Bachelor’s degree
8
42
 Master’s degree
3
16
Job title/Type of teacher
 Lead teacher
7
37
  Assistant teacher
7
37
 Director of early learning center
2
10.5
 Family care provider
(at-home child care)
2
10.5
 Coach/mentor
1
5
Years of teaching or childcare experience
 0–5
2
10.5
 6–9
6
31.5
 10 or more
11
58
Hours per week teaching children
 30 or more (full-time)
14
73.5
 10–29 h
3
16
 9 h or less
2
10.5
Age(s) of children you  teacha
 0–1 years old
6
10
 1–2
7
12
 2–3
8
13.5
 3–4
14
27
 4–5
13
22
 5–6
8
13.5
 Other (school aged)
3
5
Number of age groups you  teachb
 1
3
16
 2
7
36.8
 3
2
10.5
Table 1  (continued)
Characteristic
n
(%)
 4
3
16
 5
0
0
 6
4
21
20 teachers submitted lesson plan templates but one teacher did 
not identify herself. Therefore, only 19 participants are reported in 
Table 1
a 17 teachers taught more than one age group. bAn age group is com-
parable to a grade level (i.e. 3–4 year olds; 5–6 year olds)
880
 
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888
1 3
Data Analysis
SEL lesson plan templates were analyzed using researcher-
generated document analysis where documents are prepared 
by the investigator (e.g. lesson plan template) to learn more 
about the person, situation or event being investigating 
(Bowen, 2009; Merriam, 1998). First, teachers’ handwrit-
ten templates were transcribed by one researcher into a table 
(one row per template, one column per section). Thereaf-
ter, the second researcher reviewed all original templates 
and the transcription, identifying and correcting omissions. 
Researchers then became immersed in reading, reflecting 
on and exploring the content (Bazeley and Jackson, 2013). 
Both researchers read the transcript fully, noting interest-
ing or unusual observations by writing analytic memos. As 
analysis proceeded, procedures, processes, and reflections 
were documented in a reflexive diary to form an audit trail. 
Epistemological reflexivity (Palaganas et al., 2017) was 
practiced to counter threats to trustworthiness (e.g. reac-
tivity, researcher bias) by questioning how the study was 
conceptualized, reconsidering avenues and methods for data 
analysis, and through inter-researcher discussion about the 
nature of the study and the data allowing for an examination 
of assumptions (Mauthner & Doucet, 2003).
Content analysis (Dey, 1993) was used to investigate the 
lesson plan descriptions, specifically to identify the many 
types of children’s behavioral challenges, SEL skills, teach-
ing strategies and child outcomes identified on the templates. 
Quantitative content analysis was employed to analyze fre-
quencies within these components. Inductive thematic analy-
sis (Braun & Clarke, 2006) was also used to identify patterns 
emerging from the data. Each pattern was then evaluated for 
levels along a continuum using dimensionalization coding 
(Gray, 2018) described in Appendix A. This method is also 
referred to as magnitude coding (Saldaná, 2016). Dimen-
sion/magnitude codes (e.g. low, moderate, high behavioral 
challenge) were then quantitized, converting qualitative data 
into quantitative form (Sandelowski et al., 2009) to popu-
late a data set of ordinal variables (ranked data) for further 
descriptive and inferential statistical analyses. Creating 
quantitative variables transitioned the study from Phase 1 
to Phase 2 of this adapted ESMM design.
Coding and Analytic Memos
Initial observations, insights and questions were docu-
mented as analytic memos using the comments feature in 
the document containing the transcribed table of all lesson 
plan templates. Analytic memo writing continued through-
out the coding process yielding 101 total memos. Then, 
descriptive coding was applied across all sections of the 
lesson plan templates to better summarize the data, as a first 
cycle coding method (Saldaná, 2016). At this stage, in vivo 
coding was also frequently used to summarize the data using 
participants’ exact phrases. Data were coded for types of 
behavioral challenges first, then types of SEL skills, then 
types of teaching strategies. A process of pattern coding, 
as a second level of analysis (Saldaná, 2016), then began 
which included rereading the data, the initial descriptive and 
in vivo codes and the analytic memos to identify patterns 
within and across the data.
Several patterns emerged as the basis for further analy-
sis: children’s behavioral challenges could be categorized by 
difficulty level (low, moderate, high), the SEL skills could 
be categorized along a continuum of specificity (general to 
concrete), the teaching strategies listed on each lesson plan 
could be categorized by specificity (general to concrete), 
all sections of the lesson plan template could be evaluated 
together for alignment (low, moderate, high) and reflec-
tions on child outcomes could be evaluated for level of child 
success (none, partial, notable). These levels (dimension/
magnitude codes) were not selected a priori but were iden-
tified from the inductive analytic process. Definitions for 
each of these levels within each of these categories were 
established by referring to exemplars in the data (Appendix 
A). Having identified these dimensions for each section of 
the template, the dimension coding technique was applied 
(Gray, 2018) to another cycle of coding, this time analyzing 
and rating every section of every template according to these 
dimension codes (e.g. these codes were applied to the data 
by manually typing underneath each section of each template 
the corresponding dimension code such as a “low,” “moder-
ate” or “high” about a behavioral challenge). This process 
has also been described as magnitude coding which adds 
a coded datum to indicate the degree of evaluative content 
(Miles et al., 2014).
Each researcher coded the data using different text colors 
to facilitate a process of intercoder negotiated agreement 
(Campbell et al., 2013). Initial rounds of dimension/mag-
nitude coding produced differences in ratings between the 
two coders. A subsequent round of dimension coding was 
then conducted by rereading the original codes and noting 
the intercoder discrepancy, rereading the data, rereading 
the analytic memos, reviewing the data again in the context 
of the rating scale definitions (Appendix A), writing new 
memos and then arriving at a final dimension code decision, 
thus resolving the coding dispute.
Descriptive Statistics and Correlational Analyses
Qualitative data were rated using inductively derived dimen-
sional codes and then quantitized (e.g. 1, 2, 3), creating 
ranked data for correlational analyses among five newly cre-
ated ordinal variables: level of behavioral challenge; speci-
ficity of SEL skills; specificity of the teaching strategies 
employed; alignment across lesson plan sections; and, level 
881
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888 
1 3
of student success after instruction. These variables were 
then entered into SPSS, version 28. Frequencies (dimension 
code counts; percentages) and descriptive statistics (mean, 
median, standard deviations) were then calculated for each 
variable.
Spearman’s rank correlation analyses were then per-
formed to determine if there were significant relationships 
between the five variables. Spearman’s rho was used because 
it is a non-parametric statistic appropriate for use with 
ranked data (Howell, 2012). We also ran a Kendall’s tau 
correlational analysis, a similar non-parametric correlation 
used “when there is a small data set with a large number of 
tied ranks” (Field, 2013, p. 278) which calculates a slightly 
more conservative coefficient. Running these statistical tests 
to answer related research questions represented Phase 3 of 
the ESMM approach.
Findings
RQ 1: Types of Behavioral Challenges and Their 
Frequency
Seventy unique behavioral challenges were identified on 
the 61 SEL lesson plan templates. The 70 challenges were 
coded for behavioral type and description. Nine unique cat-
egories of behavioral challenge emerged through inductive 
content analysis and are organized by frequency (Table 2). 
As shown, aggression was addressed most frequently on 
individualized SEL lesson plans (n = 20, 29%). Examples 
included hitting, pushing, scratching, yelling at others, 
throwing things at others and aggressive play.
RQ 2: Difficulty Level of Behavioral Challenges
Sixty-one templates were analyzed for overall behavioral 
challenge difficulty level (Table 3). There was a fairly even 
split between moderate and high difficulty (46%) and low 
difficulty (54%) challenges addressed on the lesson plans.
RQ 3: Types of SEL Skills and Their Frequency
Using descriptive and in vivo coding, 117 SEL skills were 
identified on the templates. These SEL skills were grouped 
by behavioral challenge area (e.g. skills to reduce aggression 
or increase sharing) and then synthesized down to 41 unique 
skills using pattern coding to collapse duplicative skills. The 
non-duplicative list of 41 SEL skills was then reanalyzed for 
emergent categories, identifying 17 skill clusters. The 17 skill 
clusters were also reanalyzed, and four skill themes emerged. 
Each theme represented a core SEL competency area. Table 4 
presents the four SEL competency areas, associated SEL skill 
clusters, and related skill examples. Social skills represented 
nearly half of the SEL skills taught to children (49%), with the 
Table 2  Frequency of behavioral challenges on individualized SEL lesson plans
Behavioral challenges and examples
n
(%)
1
Aggression
Hitting, pushing, scratching, yelling, throwing, aggressive play
20
29
2
Noncompliance
Not following directions or routines; not listening, not transitioning, not cleaning up
17
24
3
Not sharing
Not taking turns, not sharing toys, taking toys from others, not sharing play roles (e.g. being the leader)
13
19
4
Disrupting peers
Interrupting peers’ work and play, excessive touching, not playing well, impatience with peers
7
10
5
Negative emotions
Separation anxiety, nervousness, temper tantrums, grumpiness
6
9
6
High or low voice volume
Speaking too loudly or quietly, not speaking up at all
3
4
7
Self-help challenges
Using the toilet
2
3
8
Friendship development
Not developing new friendships
1
1
9
Throwing toys, non-aggressively
1
1
Total behavioral challenges
70
100
Table 3  Behavioral challenges 
reported on SEL lesson plans 
(N = 61)
Degree of Difficulty
n
(%)
High
13
21.3
Moderate
15
24.6
Low
33
54.1
882
 
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888
1 3
rest being compliance skills, emotional functioning skills and 
body control skills.
RQ 4: Specificity of SEL Skills
Table 5 reports that 54% of lesson plans contained a loosely 
specified description of the SEL skills children were supposed 
to learn through individualized instruction, while 39% of SEL 
skills were at least moderately specified. The number of skills 
written on each template were also counted (median = 2.00).
RQ 5: Specificity of Teaching Strategies
Each lesson plan was analyzed for the specificity of the 
teaching strategies used, with loosely specified plans 
limited to general teaching methods such as modeling, 
verbal reminders and/or praise while very specified plans 
contained several concrete actions to coach the child to 
practice a new skill, such as using cuing, role-playing, and 
direct instruction as warranted. The median lesson plan 
was moderately specified (median = 2.00), containing one 
concrete action and mostly clear teaching strategies. Les-
son plans were at least moderately specified in 64 percent 
of cases, containing one or more concrete actions to coach 
children’s SEL skill development (Table 6).
RQ 6: Alignment Between Lesson Plan Components
Table 7 shows that most lesson plan templates (79%) dem-
onstrated partial or full alignment between the description 
of the child’s behavioral challenge, the associated SEL 
skills to be taught, and the teaching strategies used.
Table 4  Frequency of SEL skills on individualized SEL lesson plans
SEL competency areas, skill clusters and related skill examples
n
(%)
1
Social skills
Cooperative play, teamwork, sharing & turn taking, communication, how to make friends
20
48.8
Ask others to play, let others lead, find another toy, wait for a turn, how to verbalize needs, apologize, use gentle hands
2
Compliance Skills
Following the schedule or routine, listening, following directions
10
24.4
How to stop playing to transition, how to select a new activity, hand raising, looking at the teacher to hear instructions, remem-
bering rules
3
Emotional Functioning and Self-Regulation Skills
Managing anger, practicing positive emotional expressions (e.g smiling) perspective taking, patience, coping skills, problem-
solving
8
19.5
Cope with negative feelings, use breathing to calm down, greet friends with a smile, patiently wait for a turn
4
Body Control Skills
Body awareness, boundaries, not bumping into others
3
7.3
Understand how your body can hurt someone if you are big or rough, respect personal space, apologize for bumping others
Total SEL Skills
41
100
Table 5  Specificity of SEL skills on lesson plans (N = 61)
SEL skill specificity
n
%
Very specified
7
11.5
Moderately specified
17
27.9
Loosely specified
33
54.1
Unspecified
4
6.6
Table 6  Specificity of teaching 
strategies on SEL lesson plans 
(N = 61)
SEL skill specificity
n
%
Very specified
11
18
Moderately specified
28
45.9
Loosely specified
21
34.4
Unspecified
1
1.6
Table 7  Alignment between 
lesson plan components 
(N = 61)
Alignment levels
n
%
Fully aligned
28
45.9
Partially aligned
20
32.8
Not aligned
13
21.3
Table 8  Child outcome 
following individualized SEL 
instruction (n = 55)
Characteristic
n
%
Successful
15
24.6
Partially successful
21
34.4
Unsuccessful
19
31.1
883
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888 
1 3
RQ 7: Frequency of Successful Child Outcomes
Teachers reported progress they observed in children fol-
lowing implementation of each lesson plan. Fifty-five les-
son plan templates were analyzed with child results data, 
coding each template for degree of successful child out-
come along a dimension with three levels: successful, par-
tially successful, unsuccessful (Table 8). As shown, 59% 
of lesson plans were successful or partially successful at 
improving behavior and/or SEL skills in young children, 
while 31% were unsuccessful.
RQ 8: Statistical Relationships Between Lesson Plan 
Components and Child Outcomes
Table 9 reports all spearman’s rank correlational analyses. 
Five relationships are significantly positively related to vary-
ing degrees (weak to strong). There was a moderately strong, 
positive correlation between specificity of teaching strategies 
and children’s SEL improvement  rs(53) = 0.51 p < 0.001. As 
teaching strategies became more specified and concrete, chil-
dren’s SEL outcomes tended to improve. There was a strong, 
positive correlation between lesson plan alignment and suc-
cessful child outcomes  rs(53) = 0.65, p < 0.001. As lesson 
plan alignment increased, children’s positive SEL outcomes 
tended to increase. Teaching strategy specificity and overall 
lesson plan alignment were also highly correlated r = 0.69, 
p < 0.01. Likewise, there were weak positive correlations 
between behavioral difficulty and teaching strategy specific-
ity (r = 0.25, p < 0.05) and between behavioral difficulty and 
lesson plan alignment, r = 0.25, p < 0.05. There was not a 
statistically significant relationship between behavioral chal-
lenge level and children’s SEL improvement  rs(53) = 0.22 
p < 0.10. Nor was there a statistically significant relationship 
between SEL skill specificity and children’s SEL improve-
ment  rs(53) = 0.10 p < 0.475. All significant coefficients in 
Table 9 were also statistically significant using Kendall’s 
tau, with one exception: there was no significant relation-
ship between behavioral difficulty level and specificity of 
teaching strategies used by the teacher, r = 0.23, p = 0.053.
Discussion
By writing individualized SEL lesson plans teachers can 
become proactive, rather than reactive, in addressing chal-
lenging behavior (NAEYC, 2019). Best practices to sup-
port social and emotional development in early childhood 
include giving children diverse opportunities to practice 
skills needed to regulate emotions, attention, and behav-
ior, to enter social groups, learn to help, to resolve conflicts 
constructively, consider other’s perspectives, to discuss and 
solve problems, and to practice other prosocial behaviors 
(NAEYC, 2019, p. 22).
Teachers should help individual children learn 
socially appropriate behavior by providing guidance 
that is consistent with a child’s level of development. 
Good teachers notice patterns in children’s challeng-
ing behaviors such as physical aggression, relational 
aggression, verbal bullying, tantrums, whining, testing 
limits, and refusal to follow directions. They can assess 
the function of a behavior and provide thoughtful, con-
sistent, and individualized responses whenever they 
occur. (Masterson, 2021, p. 42)
As Masterson (2021) described, good teachers notice 
patterns in common behavioral challenges, such as aggres-
sion or not following directions, and provide individualized 
guidance in response. This study found that the behavio-
ral challenges early childhood teachers primarily address 
when providing individualized instruction are, in this order: 
aggression, noncompliance, not sharing, disrupting peers, 
and negative emotion (e.g. tantrums). It also found that chil-
dren can make notable progress in SEL skill and behavioral 
improvement following a teacher’s individualized support, 
so long as the teaching strategies employed are appropriately 
aligned with the behavioral challenge and the skill(s) being 
taught and are concrete and specific.
Successful child outcomes were reported across the les-
son plans when they demonstrated alignment between the 
challenge, the skill(s) to be taught and the teaching strategies 
to be employed and when the teaching strategies were con-
crete and direct for the child, such as using cuing, involving 
Table 9  Means, standard 
deviations, and intercorrelations 
(Spearman’s rho) for scores on 
five measures of SEL lesson 
plans
a Correlation coefficient for difficulty of the challenge and student success. bOrdinal variables measured on 
a scale of 1–3. cOrdinal variable measured on a scale of 0–3
*Correlations are significant at p < .05. ** p < .01
Measure
M
SD
1
2
3
4
5
1. Difficulty of behavioral  challengeb
1.67
.81
1.0
2. SEL skill  specificityc
1.44
.79
−.07
1.0
3. Teaching strategies  specificityb
1.80
.75
.25*
.16
1.0
4. Lesson plan  alignmentb
2.25
.79
.25*
.18
.69**
1.0
5. Student  successb
1.93
.79
.22a
.10
.51**
.65**
1.0
884
 
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888
1 3
the child in a role-playing activity or a story about the SEL 
skill, and through direct coaching. Unsuccessful lesson plans 
tended to rely exclusively on giving verbal reminders, mod-
eling good behavior from a distance, and using praise, with-
out providing more direct guidance or instruction or a means 
for the child to practice the desired skills. The importance 
of having children practice the desired skills in the context 
of providing personalized instruction has been previously 
discussed (Muñoz-Martínez & Porter, 2020). Successful les-
son plans showed children how to practice a behavior or skill 
(e.g. how to enter group play, how to seek out an alternative 
toy, how to smile while greeting friends, how to use gentle 
hands), and did not just give children verbal reminders to do 
the right thing or merely praise their efforts. This research 
shows is that through professional development early child-
hood teachers can learn to write and implement individu-
alized SEL lesson plans in response to children’s typical 
behavioral challenges, reflect on children’s results following 
instruction and witness notable progress in children’s behav-
ior and skills, so long as their plan is coherent (aligned), 
and provides concrete guidance to the child, a finding sup-
ported by the planning literature (Drost & Levine, ; Serret 
& Gripton, 2020).
Counterintuitively, there was not a significant correlation 
between the difficulty level of the challenging behavior and 
the success of the lesson plan for the child. One assump-
tion was that less challenging behaviors addressed on les-
son plans would also be related to higher success levels for 
children. In this sample, whether the teacher was address-
ing a high, moderate or low difficulty behavioral challenge 
made little difference in the success of the lesson plan. The 
child’s behavioral starting point is not of primary impor-
tance. Rather, the level of coherent and concrete guidance 
provided to that child matters the most (Epstein, 2009; Katz 
& McClellan, 1997; Kersey & Masterson, 2013).
Similarly, how specifically teachers documented the 
learning objective(s), meaning the SEL skills to be taught, 
was also not meaningfully related to child SEL outcomes. 
This finding was surprising because it was assumed that the 
more specifically the teacher could describe the underly-
ing SEL skills she was trying to teach, the more successful 
children would be at learning those skills. Instead, findings 
revealed that the SEL skills being taught could be embed-
ded into the specific teaching strategies even if they were 
not concretely articulated independently on the lesson plan 
template as learning objectives. Most important, as reported 
in Table 9, was overall alignment across all elements of the 
lesson plan (Drost & Levine, 2015; Serret & Gripton, 2020) 
and one of those elements was SEL skill identification. 
Therefore, child outcomes depended not on how concretely 
the teacher could write the learning objective but rather how 
well she could translate that objective into concrete teach-
ing strategies that clearly addressed the SEL skill and the 
behavioral challenge (alignment). In other words, the reality 
of the behavioral challenge and nature of the SEL skill(s) 
to be taught both need to be carried forward into a specific 
instructional plan that embodies them to noticeably affect 
child outcomes.
Limitations
Study limitations include a small sample size limiting 
generalizability, reliance on teacher judgement of student 
achievement (Meissel et al., 2017) because SEL outcomes 
were not independently assessed, and the inability to make 
casual claims with correlational analyses. With regards to 
teacher report bias, teachers did not appear to inflate positive 
child outcomes as only 24% were successful compared to 
34% partially successful and 31% unsuccessful. Conveni-
ence sampling resulted in an experienced group of teach-
ers participating in the study and the lack of novice teacher 
participation.
Suggestions for Future Research
Future research should address the methodological limita-
tions noted above by using researcher observation in the 
classroom to confirm that the content of the lesson plans 
is reflected in actual instructional methods and to observe 
or assess SEL outcomes in children to independently con-
firm student growth. Future researchers might also want to 
experiment with different lesson plan processes, such as that 
presented by Muñoz-Martínez and Porter (2020, p. 1563), 
to determine if alternatively structured plans prove more 
effective.
Suggestions for Practice
Even experienced early childhood teachers need more pro-
fessional development around how to articulate specific SEL 
skills, as 34% of lesson plans were rated “loosely specified” 
in this area. Likewise, the fact that 54% of lesson plans 
were rated as “partially aligned” or “not aligned” also illu-
minates a need to unpack examples of aligned lesson plans 
for early childhood teachers in future professional develop-
ment. Additionally, teachers are more likely to write effec-
tive SEL lesson plans if they are given a compendium7 of 
concrete teachings strategies that align with specific SEL 
skills and corresponding behavioral challenges to improve 
the frequency with which they write specific plans. This 
study found that only 18% of lesson plans contained “very 
7 This compendium must be reported separately due to word count 
limitations.
885
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888 
1 3
specified” teaching strategies and there was a significant 
correlation between using specifc teaching strategies and 
successful child SEL outcomes. By providing professional 
development about SEL lesson planning in early childhood, 
in-service teachers will be able to improve each element 
of their plans and increase positive child outcomes. More 
targeted training in SEL lesson planning is needed because 
31% of lesson plans were rated as has having “unsuccessful” 
child outcomes.
Conclusion
This study illuminated a component of the social-emotional 
curriculum in early childhood: writing, implementing and 
reflecting on individualized SEL lesson plans for children 
ages 2–6. As a professional development exercise, asking 
in-service teachers to practice writing individualized SEL 
lesson plans was partially or notably successful for children 
in 59% of the cases, but this result could be significantly 
improved. Correlational findings examining the relation-
ships between lesson plan features and teacher reports of 
unsuccessful, partially successful or notably successful SEL 
outcomes suggest that the most important characteristics of 
individualized SEL lesson plans are (1) the degree of coher-
ence/alignment across all components of the lesson plan 
template, and (2) the specificity of the teaching strategies 
implemented. Future research and teacher training should 
explore how to improve these two characteristics to ensure 
that SEL lesson planning becomes increasingly affective for 
young children.
Appendix A
Rating Scale Definitions
Behavioral Difficulty Level
We used dimensionalization to analyze the degree of behav-
ioral difficulty in three levels: low, moderate, high. High dif-
ficulty challenges included high levels of negative emotion, 
including “being very aggressive towards peers,” “anger and 
crying for excessive amounts of time,” and combinations of 
multiple challenging behaviors all on one lesson plan, such 
as “hitting other children, throwing balls at other children, 
and snatching toys from them.” With regards to degrees of 
aggression, we coded “repeatedly hitting other children” 
as high difficulty and “occasionally hitting a child without 
provocation” as moderate difficulty. Moderate difficulty 
included moderate forms of aggression or moderate negative 
emotion and behavior, such as “aggressive play,” “throw-
ing blocks,” “anger and yelling at peers,” “not talking,” and 
“needing constant redirection.” Low difficulty challenges 
presented less pronounced expressions of negative emo-
tion (e.g. impatience with peers, being grumpy, being sad 
when mom leaves), and typical expressions of behavior that 
needed occasional redirection (e.g. not transitioning between 
centers, not napping, touching others too much, not cleaning 
up, interrupting other’s play, not listening to the teacher). 
The behavioral difficulty codes were quantitized (low = 1, 
moderate = 2, high = 3) and added to an SPSS data set for 
descriptive and inferential analysis.
SEL Skills and Skill Specificity
Each SEL skill was identified within all 61 lesson plans and 
then grouped by behavioral challenge. Three cycles of con-
tent analysis were completed to synthesize the original list 
of SEL skills into common categories to reduce duplication 
(e.g. self-regulation and sharing were mentioned repeat-
edly). This process reduced the number of SEL skills from 
117 to 41.
Each SEL skill section on the lesson plan template was 
also coded for level of specificity using dimensionalization. 
Skills listed by teachers were labeled as unspecified, loosely 
specified, moderately specified and very specified. Unspeci-
fied labels were assigned to data that did not contain SEL 
skills (e.g., “child needs to learn how to read”). Loosely 
specified SEL skills contained broad ideas (e.g. “self-regu-
lation”) without concrete actions and were somewhat clear. 
Moderately specified skills contained at least one concrete 
action (e.g., “how to ask for a turn with a toy”) and were 
mostly clear. Very specified skill descriptions contained 
multiple concrete actions, which were interrelated and very 
clear. The SEL skill specificity codes were quantitized (0, 
1, 2, 3) and add to the data set for descriptive and inferential 
analysis.
Lesson Plan Specificity
We also analyzed how specifically the teaching strategies 
were described. We rated each lesson plan as unspecified/
missing (0), loosely specified (1), moderately specified (2) 
and very specified (3). One lesson plan was rated “unspeci-
fied” for presenting tips to help the child with spelling and 
reading while not addressing any SEL skills. Loosely speci-
fied plans presented only general ideas such as modeling, 
using verbal reminders and providing positive reinforcement 
for the child, but not intervening to provide concrete coach-
ing so  that the child could practice the new skill(s). Mod-
erately specific lesson plans contained general ideas plus at 
least one concrete action to intervene and coach the child 
(e.g. using cues with the child). It was mostly clear how the 
SEL skill was taught. Very specified lesson plans contained 
several concrete actions to teach missing SEL skills(s), 
886
 
Early Childhood Education Journal (2023) 51:875–888
1 3
presented in a coherent sequence of steps. It was very clear 
how the skill was taught. This qualitative rating scale was 
quantitized (0, 1, 2, 3) and the numeric codes were added to 
an SPSS data set.
Alignment Level
To evaluate the overall coherence of each lesson plan we 
examined the continuity of the ideas presented across each 
section of the template. This examination was done by cod-
ing each template for the level of alignment between teacher 
reported behavioral challenges, SEL skills to be taught and 
subsequent teaching strategies. Templates were rated as 
not aligned, partially aligned, and fully aligned with corre-
sponding codes (1, 2, 3) entered in a data set for descriptive 
and inferential analysis.
Child Success Level
We coded the child outcomes teachers reported by degree 
of success (successful, partially successful, not successful), 
again using the dimensionalization coding technique (Gray, 
2018). A successful child outcome was defined as obvious 
and notable progress made by the child to improve the behav-
ioral issue and/or develop the SEL skill(s) identified on the 
lesson plan. Perfect mastery of the SEL skill or complete 
elimination of the challenging behavior was not required for 
a successful rating. Rather, notable progress was the key met-
ric. A partially successful child outcome was defined as lim-
ited progress in behavior and SEL skills. The teacher clearly 
indicated some degree of growth in the child. Finally, a not 
successful outcome meant the teacher could not identify how 
the original target behavior or SEL skills had improved. Tan-
gential outcomes might be provided, such as reflections on 
the child’s current behavior or what happened in general, but 
the description lacked an identifiable example of improve-
ment tied to the original lesson plan objectives.
Appendix B
SEL Coaching Action Plan
1. Think of a child who needs coaching to improve her/his 
social interactions. Choose a child who is functioning in 
the moderate range the first time you try this.
2. What is the repeating pattern of behavior that is a chal-
lenge for this child?
3. How do you plan to coach the child over the following 
days?
4. Consider these elements when writing your action plan 
to coach the child: Child observes situation first; child 
does something to help the group; child uses words that 
facilitate participation; child asks permission to partici-
pate; child accepts role given by leader; child notices 
cues from others
Child____________________
Time Frame___________________
1. What is the repeating pattern of behavior that is a chal-
lenge for this child?
2. What does the child need to learn? What is the missing 
skill(s) that needs to be coached?
3. Describe how you plan to coach the child over the fol-
lowing week.
• What will you do and say? When, where, how?
• What will you coach the child to do and say?
• Are there any cues you will establish with the child 
to remind him to use the tips?
• How will you have the child reflect on his/her suc-
cess?
4. How will you make sure the child practices the new 
skills?
5. After coaching reflection: What is the child doing now? 
What new skill(s) does the child seem to be practicing 
more frequently? What are the current results?
Acknowledgements The authors thank Dr. Leona Donaldson for tran-
scription and coding assistance.
Funding This study was supported by Drexel University.
