1 3
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-022-00725-w
ORIGINAL PAPER
Early Childhood Preservice Teachers’ Perceptions of Computer Science, 
Gender Stereotypes, and Coding in Early Childhood Education
Fatih Ari1  · Ismahan Arslan‑Ari1 · Lucas Vasconcelos1
Accepted: 25 March 2022 
© Association for Educational Communications & Technology 2022
Abstract
The purpose of this exploratory study was to investigate early childhood preservice teachers’ perceptions of computer sci-
ence and gender stereotypes in computer science, and perceptions of coding in early childhood education. Quantitative and 
qualitative data were collected from early childhood preservice teachers enrolled in a teaching methods course at a large 
southeastern university in the U.S. Findings showed that participants had misconceptions about what CS is and what com-
puter scientists do. They were also neutral about coding and its integration in early childhood education. Both qualitative 
and quantitative data supported that the participants did not hold gender stereotypes in CS.
Keywords Early childhood education · Preservice teachers · Computer science · Coding · Gender stereotypes
Introduction
Computer science (CS) education in K-12 has received 
considerable attention worldwide in the last decade. With 
many resources freely available and the advances in com-
puting technologies, K-12 educators have been exploring 
different ways of infusing CS in formal and informal edu-
cational settings, expanding to early education years (Bers, 
2019). However, many efforts and initiatives of integrating 
CS education during early education years are mainly extra-
curricular and voluntary, benefitting students who usually 
hold high interest in CS and come from families with high 
socioeconomic status (Funke et al., 2016; Goode & Mar-
golis, 2011). Furthermore, aligned with the general gender 
disparities in CS, early childhood CS opportunities mostly 
attract boys (Cheryan et al., 2015). In addition, teaching 
CS in early childhood education requires developmentally 
appropriate learning experiences for young children rather 
than implementing strategies designed for older children 
(Bers, 2019; Bers et al., 2014). Therefore, there is a need 
for teaching CS in early childhood in a more inclusive, age-
appropriate, and curriculum-integrated manner (Bers, 2019; 
Lee, 2020). In this sense, involving early childhood teach-
ers in CS education and understanding their perceptions of 
CS, especially their gender stereotypes, become necessary 
to infuse CS in early childhood education successfully. A 
growing body of research focuses on the implementation 
(e.g., tools, software) of CS education with CS teachers in 
K-12 settings (Chang & Peterson, 2018); however, research 
focusing on non-CS teachers, especially early childhood pre-
service teachers, is scarce. Considering the recent attempts 
across the world to introduce CS concepts and processes in 
early childhood education, preparing early childhood teach-
ers for this challenging task becomes a necessity.
Preservice Teachers’ Perceptions of CS Education 
and Coding
Teachers are pivotal for integrating CS education in K-12 
classrooms (Butler & Leahy, 2021; Yadav et al., 2017). 
However, research showed that many teachers hold nar-
row perspectives about CS education, considering it pri-
marily equivalent to using computers (Li, 2021; Yadav 
et al., 2014). For instance, Yadav et al. (2014) reported 
that preservice teachers who were not trained for com-
putational thinking perceived computational thinking as 
 * Fatih Ari 
 
arifatih@mailbox.sc.edu; fatihari@gmail.com
 
Ismahan Arslan-Ari 
 
arslanai@mailbox.sc.edu
 
Lucas Vasconcelos 
 
limadel@mailbox.sc.edu
1 
Learning Design and Technologies Program, University 
of South Carolina, Wardlaw College 130, Columbia, 
SC 29208, USA
/ Published online: 23 April 2022
TechTrends (2022) 66:539–546
using computer technology whereas those who completed 
a week-long computational thinking module developed a 
more accurate conceptualization of computational think-
ing as a problem solving process using computing con-
cepts with or without computers, in addition to positive 
attitudes towards integrating it into their future teaching. 
In a recent study by Butler and Leahy (2021), preservice 
teachers who completed a specialization in digital learning 
developed a better understanding of computational think-
ing concepts and how to teach them to children compared 
to their initial understandings. Similarly, Connolly et al. 
(2020) found that preservice teachers who participated in 
a makerspace program focusing on computational thinking 
and its integration into teaching demonstrated improved 
attitudes towards computing and efficacy beliefs in embed-
ding computational thinking in their teaching.
In addition to these, several studies explored preser-
vice teachers’ perceptions of and attitudes towards coding 
and computer programming (e.g., Cetin, 2016, Lloyd & 
Chandra, 2020; Yukselturk & Altiok, 2017). Cetin (2016) 
compared attitudes towards programming in two groups 
of preservice teachers exposed to block-based program-
ming and text-based programming instruction groups over 
a 6-week period. Study findings showed that preservice 
teachers’ attitudes toward programming were not affected 
by the programming medium. In another study, Yukselturk 
and Altiok (2017) found that preservice teachers’ negative 
attitudes toward programming significantly decreased after 
they worked with Scratch in a semester-long programming 
course. However, preservice teachers’ willingness to take 
on more programming courses and their efficacy beliefs 
in learning programming did not change after the course. 
In a recent qualitative case study by Lloyd and Chandra 
(2020), senior preservice teachers who had prior experi-
ence with programming and robotics demonstrated a clear 
understanding of what coding and computational thinking 
are and emphasized the importance of coding skills for 
students in the 21st century. These findings clearly support 
the notion that developing an accurate understanding of 
CS education and positive perceptions about integrating 
CS education into teaching are crucial for encouraging 
preservice teachers to integrate CS education into K-12 
classrooms (Butler & Leahy, 2021).
Although some attempts have been made to understand 
and improve preservice teachers’ perceptions of and atti-
tudes toward CS education (e.g., Yadav et al., 2014), 
research focusing on early childhood preservice teachers is 
still in its infancy (Angeli et al., 2016). To our knowledge, 
there are only a few studies that explored early childhood 
preservice teachers’ experiences with and perceptions of 
CS education (e.g., Bers et al., 2002; Chang & Peterson, 
2018), indicating a need for more research in this area.
Gender Stereotypes in CS
CS as a discipline has been extensively described by edu-
cators as a narrow and “leaky pipeline” (Almukhambe-
tova et al., 2021; Berg et al., 2018; Varma & Hahn, 2008). 
First, the pipeline is narrow because the population in CS 
is predominantly formed by White males (Beyer, 2014). 
And second, the pipeline is leaky because minorities (e.g., 
females and people of color) who decide to join CS face 
higher attrition rates and end up switching educational and 
career paths (Clark, 2005; Varma & Hahn, 2008). These 
two factors lead to a field that lacks gender and racial 
diversity. In fact, females are critically underrepresented 
in CS (Graham & Latulipe, 2003; Pantic et al., 2018). Data 
shows that approximately 25% of professionals in the com-
puting industry were female in 2020 (Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, 2021).
One of the main factors leading to female underrepre-
sentation in CS is stereotypes and misconceptions about 
the field, and about who can succeed (Pantic et al., 2018). 
Over the course of their lives, females are continuously 
exposed to stereotypical representations of a computer sci-
entist as a White male who is highly intelligent, socially 
inept, works long hours, and chooses to spend time on 
gadgets and technology (e.g., programming) rather than 
around people (Cheryan et al., 2015; Vitores & Gil-Juárez, 
2016). Meanwhile, females encounter social expectations 
to be feminine, sociable, and concerned about domestic 
and family matters (Camussi & Leccardi, 2005). These 
stereotypes about CS, in many instances, clash with social 
expectations for females. This undercuts their sense of 
identity and perceived ability. Specifically, females 
become unable to envision themselves as computer scien-
tists, and to develop self-perceptions as capable individu-
als who can succeed in the field. As far as we know, no 
previous research has investigated early childhood preser-
vice teachers’ stereotypical beliefs in CS. Furthermore, 
considering that the majority of teachers, especially the 
early childhood teachers, are female in K-12 education 
(Zha et al., 2020) and that they serve as role models for 
young children (Master et al., 2014; Olsson & Martiny, 
2018), it is important to understand the full extent of their 
stereotypes in CS (e.g., gender) early in their teacher train-
ing programs and offer strategies that would help them 
debunk such stereotypes before they start their teaching 
careers.
Hence, with this exploratory mixed methods study, our 
goal was to understand early childhood preservice teach-
ers’ perceptions of CS and gender stereotypes in CS, and 
perceptions about coding in early childhood education. In 
this study, we addressed the following research questions:
540
TechTrends (2022) 66:539–546
1 3
1. What are early childhood preservice teachers’ under-
standings of CS education in general?
2. Do early childhood preservice teachers hold gender ste-
reotypes in CS?
3. What are early childhood preservice teachers’ percep-
tions of coding and its integration in early childhood 
education?
Methods
Study Context and Participants
Thirty-four senior early childhood preservice teachers, 
enrolled in two sections of an early childhood mathematics 
methods course at a large public university in the Southeast 
U.S, participated in this study. Due to the COVID-19 pan-
demic, the course was delivered online. The same instruc-
tor taught both sections. All of the participants were female 
and their ages ranged from 21 to 30, with a mean age of 
22.09. Twenty-six of the participants identified themselves 
as White, four as Black or African American, two as His-
panic or Latino, and one as Asian. Only three participants 
reported that they had experience with coding prior to this 
study. To ensure confidentiality, we used pseudonyms when 
presenting qualitative findings.
Instruments
This exploratory study implemented a cross-sectional sur-
vey design to examine early childhood preservice teachers’ 
perceptions of CS, gender stereotypes in CS, and integration 
of coding into early childhood education. Quantitative data 
was collected through an online survey consisting of three 
subscales: perceptions of coding (5 items), integration of 
coding into teaching (6 items), and gender stereotypes in CS 
(5 items). The items measuring participants’ perceptions of 
integration of coding into teaching were adapted from Yadav 
et al.’s (2014) study. The items measuring participants’ per-
ceptions of coding and gender stereotypes were created by 
the researchers. Two experts, one with a master’s degree in 
CS, reviewed the adapted items for face validity. To check 
the internal consistency of the subscales, Cronbach’s alpha 
coefficients were calculated. The reliability coefficients for 
all subscales were good: perceptions of coding (α = 0.85), 
integration of coding into teaching (α = 0.85), and gender 
stereotypes (α = 0.92). Lastly, the qualitative data were col-
lected through open-ended questions and an adapted ver-
sion of the Draw a Computer Scientist Test by Pantic et al. 
(2018). The test asked participants to draw a computer sci-
entist and explain what their computer scientist is doing, 
identify their gender and ethnicity, and describe the typical 
day of the computer scientist.
Findings
The quantitative data were analyzed using descriptive sta-
tistics, and the qualitative data were analyzed using induc-
tive analysis through open coding and simultaneous coding 
(Saldaña, 2016). Two of the researchers analyzed a sample 
of the participants’ responses to open-ended questions and 
their draw a scientist test individually. Then, they negoti-
ated the discrepancies between their analysis and created 
a revised coding scheme. The same coders completed the 
qualitative data analysis using the revised coding scheme 
and reached an agreement at the end of the coding process. 
The findings below are presented based on the questions 
explored in this study, combining the quantitative and 
qualitative results.
Q1: Preservice Teachers’ Perceptions of Computer 
Science
We asked participants to explain what they think CS is 
and what a computer scientist does. Qualitative findings 
indicated that participants held a very narrow perspec-
tive regarding the definition of CS and what a computer 
scientist does. Many participants (n = 15) perceived CS as 
similar to programming and coding, as shown in “the study 
of programming software” (Tess), “the action of coding” 
(Samantha), and “programming software for a multitude 
of purposes” (Aveline). In addition, many participants 
(n = 14) mentioned that CS is about how to use computers 
and fixing computers. For instance, Ellie thought that CS 
is “the ability to use and navigate a computer”. Similarly, 
Riley wrote that CS is “the study of how computers work”. 
Interestingly, two participants used the word “science” in 
their definitions as shown in “using codes and technology 
for studying science” (Diana) and “working with science 
through the computer” (Amara).
Additionally, when asked about what a computer scien-
tist does, participants’ most referenced activity was devel-
oping software and computer programs (n = 19). This was 
followed by learning how to use and fix computers (n = 6), 
creating new ways of using computers (n = 5), and doing 
research (n = 4). For instance, Charley explained, “They 
[computer scientists] create softwares and codes, work 
with machines, and work with IT things”. Another partici-
pant mentioned that computer scientists “create new ways 
to use computers in life” (Randzi). Similarly, Samantha 
emphasized that computer scientists “work with computers 
and learn the inside and outside of computers”.
With the draw a scientist test, participants were also 
asked to explain the daily activities of their computer sci-
entist. Aligned with their responses to the open-ended 
541
TechTrends (2022) 66:539–546
questions, participants indicated in their drawings that 
their computer scientists were programming (n = 15), and 
fixing computers and software (n = 5). Participants’ draw-
ings also identified activities that were not mentioned in 
their written responses. These included collaborating with 
other computer scientists (n = 7), using problem solving 
skills (n = 3), working with data (n = 3), and playing video 
games (n = 3).
Together, these findings show that the majority of 
female early childhood preservice teachers who partici-
pated in this study had a very narrow understanding of 
what CS is and what a computer scientist does.
Q2: Gender Stereotypes in Computer Science
This subscale included five-point Likert-type items, 
ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). 
Results showed that participants did not hold gender ste-
reotypes in CS (M = 1.91, SD = 0.76). All of the items in 
this subscale had a mean score below 3.00. (see Table 1). 
Among all the participants, only 22 of them completed 
the draw a computer scientist test. The analysis of par-
ticipants’ drawings was also aligned with the quantitative 
results as 11 participants drew a female computer scientist 
and 11 drew a male computer scientist. Also, the majority 
of the participants identified their computer scientist as 
White (n = 16). Examples of participants’ drawings are 
provided in Fig. 1.
Q3: Preservice Teachers’ Perceptions of Coding 
and its Integration Into Teaching
Participants were asked, on a five-point Likert-type scale 
ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) to 
rate the importance of coding in early childhood education. 
Overall, they were neutral about coding in early childhood 
education (M = 3.18, SD = 0.51). It is noteworthy that par-
ticipants perceived coding as helpful for students to become 
good problem solvers in their lives (M = 3.47, SD = 0.66) and 
to choose good careers in the future (M = 3.29, SD = 0.68). 
Among all the subscale items, there was one item with a 
mean score below 3.00 (see Table 2).
To gauge participants’ perceptions of the integration of 
coding into teaching, we used six items on a four-point scale 
ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree). 
Overall, participants did not indicate high perceptions 
regarding the integration of coding into teaching (M = 2.43, 
SD = 0.58). However, on average, they acknowledged the 
importance of having background knowledge and under-
standing of coding and how to integrate it into teaching 
(M = 3.03, SD = 0.72). Of all the subscale items, only two 
items had a mean score below 2.00 (see Table 3), indicating 
they did not expect to teach coding in their future careers.
When asked about how they could integrate coding in 
early childhood education, several participants mentioned 
using games (n = 5), block-based programming such as 
Scratch (n = 2), and toys designed to teach coding concepts 
(n = 1). Additionally, two participants mentioned creating a 
technology center in their classroom where students could 
“work on coding apps that interest them” (Isabel) and “work 
Table 1  Descriptive statistics for the gender stereotypes subscale items (n = 34)
Note. Scale ranging from 1 to 5: 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = neutral, 4 = agree, 5 = strongly agree
M
SD
I think that boys are better at coding than girls.
1.79
0.91
I think that male teachers would enjoy teaching coding in their classes more than female teachers would.
1.85
0.82
I think that boys are more enthusiastic about learning how to code than girls.
1.97
0.90
If given a choice, I think that boys would be more likely to choose learning how to code than girls.
2.12
0.88
If I needed to choose a student to do a coding demonstration for the class, I think that I would unconsciously ask a boy 
to share his computer program with the whole class.
1.79
0.81
Fig. 1  Example computer scien-
tist drawings of participants
542
TechTrends (2022) 66:539–546
1 3
on computer developing apps” (Sydney). Similarly, Rose 
mentioned establishing a school-wide program for kids to 
“join and learn more about coding”. In terms of subjects, 
several participants wrote math, art, and science could be 
possible subjects where coding could easily be integrated. 
For instance, Kelly wrote, “Students can work in groups and 
come up with their own coding work through patterns. They 
can use shapes, colors, or different sized manipulatives to 
make their patterns.” Besides these, eight participants noted 
that they were not sure about how to teach coding to kids. 
For instance, Tess indicated having no “experience with cod-
ing or computer science” as the main cause for this. Simi-
larly, Ersa and Petra were not sure how to integrate coding, 
but they would “like to learn how”. Additionally, two par-
ticipants thought that allowing students to use their laptops 
would mean integrating CS into teaching. For example, Ellie 
said, CS is “already in the classroom while they [the stu-
dents] learn to use their laptops”. These examples clearly 
indicate a need to provide training for preservice teachers 
about coding and how to teach coding in early childhood 
education.
Discussion
The involvement of early childhood teachers is essential 
for age-appropriate, gender-inclusive CS education in early 
school years. Therefore, it is important to understand how 
early childhood teachers view CS and its integration in early 
childhood education and to prepare them to introduce CS 
to young children in inclusive ways. With this study, we 
explored early childhood preservice teachers’ perceptions 
of CS and their gender stereotypes in CS, and perceptions 
of coding and its integration into early childhood education. 
The findings from this study showed that participants held 
a narrow perspective in terms of a general understanding 
of what CS is. Similar to Yadav et al.’s (2014) study, the 
majority of participants perceived CS as coding, and using 
and fixing computers. Parallel to their conceptualization of 
CS, they drew computer scientists who were either program-
ming or fixing computers in the drawings (see Fig. 1). These 
shallow understandings of what CS is and what computer 
scientists do can be explained by the lack of knowledge of 
the CS field because preservice teachers, and even many in-
service teachers, have very little or no experiences with CS 
(Lloyd & Chandra, 2020). Additionally, these early child-
hood preservice teachers had been practicing internship at 
K-12 schools and many schools nowadays implement camps 
or programs on robotics and coding. It is possible that the 
participants may have experienced or heard about such pro-
grams at their internship schools, which could possibly be 
another factor for their limited depictions of CS.
In terms of gender stereotypes in CS, the findings 
revealed that the participants did not hold gender stereo-
types in CS. Both survey and qualitative data (i.e., draw a 
computer scientist test) supported this finding. For example, 
Table 2  Perceptions of coding 
in early childhood education
Note. Scale ranging from 1 to 5: 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = neutral, 4 = agree, 5 = strongly 
agree
M
SD
Teaching kids coding is essential in today’s world.
3.12
0.64
Coding should be integrated into the early childhood education curriculum.
3.06
0.60
As an early childhood education teacher of tomorrow, I believe that we should take 
courses on how to code and how to teach coding in different subject areas.
2.97
0.67
Coding would help kids to become good problem solvers in their daily lives.
3.47
0.66
Coding would help kids to choose good careers in the future.
3.29
0.68
Table 3  Perceptions of integration of coding into teaching
Note. Scale ranging from 1 to 4: 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = agree, 4 = strongly agree
M
SD
I can do well in infusing coding and computing into teaching.
2.24
0.74
I expect to use coding and computing skills in my daily life as a teacher.
1.97
0.72
I hope that my future career as a teacher will require the use of coding and computing concepts.
1.94
0.81
I think that the idea of infusing coding and computer science into teaching is interesting.
2.50
0.83
Computer science and coding can be integrated into classroom education in other fields.
2.91
0.79
Having background knowledge and understanding of how to infuse computer science and coding into one’s own 
teaching is valuable in and of itself.
3.03
0.72
543
TechTrends (2022) 66:539–546
among the participants who completed the draw a computer 
scientist test (n = 22), 11 pictured a female computer sci-
entist. Overall, this finding does not align with research 
findings indicating gender stereotypes in CS (e.g., Martin, 
2004; Pantic et al., 2018). However, it should be noted that 
participants in these studies also included male participants 
and in the current study all of the participants were female.
With regards to perceptions of coding and its integration 
into early childhood education, participants’ overall percep-
tions were not very positive. However, their ratings were 
higher than the average for several individual statements. 
For example, participants acknowledged the importance of 
teaching coding to kids, how coding would help kids become 
good problem solvers and to make good career choices in the 
future. Additionally, they reported that having background 
knowledge in coding and how to infuse coding into teaching 
is valuable for them. These findings in fact are aligned with 
the findings from previous studies (e.g., Yadav et al., 2014; 
Yukselturk & Altiok, 2017) in which preservice teachers 
reported positive perceptions and attitudes regarding coding 
after they participated in training on coding and its inte-
gration in K-12 education. The participants’ low ratings in 
general may be explained by their lack of knowledge and 
skills in coding and its integration in teaching as only three 
participants indicated previous experience with coding in 
this study.
Conclusion and Implications
This exploratory study was an initial attempt to understand 
early childhood preservice teachers’ perceptions of CS and 
gender stereotypes in CS, and perceptions of coding and 
its integration in early childhood education. The findings 
of this study highlighted the importance of training early 
childhood preservice teachers about what CS is and how to 
integrate CS in early childhood education as well as iden-
tifying and debunking their CS stereotypes. Implications 
for practice and directions for future research are discussed 
as follows.
Implications for Practice
It was evident from the findings that many participants 
had misconceptions about what CS is and what com-
puter scientists do. Specifically, participants in this study 
shared a very narrow perspective regarding CS, perceiv-
ing it as coding, programming, or using and fixing com-
puters. Also, some participants noted that they were not 
sure how to integrate coding but would like to learn how. 
These clearly emphasize the need for training early child-
hood preservice teachers on CS education, coding, and its 
integration in early childhood education. Hence, given the 
global focus on integrating CS in early childhood educa-
tion, teacher education programs should equip these future 
teachers with the knowledge and skills needed to integrate 
CS in early childhood education. However, decision mak-
ers in teacher education programs should consider that 
such training should be integrated into the curriculum 
of teacher education programs and be continuous (Ray 
et al., 2020) rather than an isolated, one-shot training. For 
example, technology integration courses targeting early 
childhood preservice teachers may offer ongoing CS train-
ing and demonstrate integration of both developmentally 
appropriate plugged and unplugged CS activities into dif-
ferent teaching settings (Mason & Rich, 2019). Addition-
ally, it is essential to provide early childhood preservice 
teachers opportunities to practice CS skills and knowledge 
hands-on and develop teaching activities integrating such 
skills in their corresponding subject areas. Connolly et al. 
(2020) demonstrated that makerspace has a great potential 
for providing hands-on CS education to preservice teach-
ers. With busy schedules of teacher education programs, 
teaching method courses in early childhood education can 
be a place to seamlessly integrate the use of makerspace 
into the curriculum where early childhood preservice 
teachers develop and practice teaching strategies for CS 
education as they learn how to code and how to teach cod-
ing to young children.
Furthermore, the findings from this study showed that 
the participants did not hold gender stereotypes in CS. 
However, this does not indicate that such stereotypical 
beliefs might not be developed in the future. In fact, half 
of the participants (n = 11) who completed the draw a com-
puter scientist test depicted male computer scientists and 
almost half of the participants (n = 16) who completed the 
survey described their computer scientists as White. This 
might indicate the existence of certain level of stereotypi-
cal notions among the participants, especially considering 
that all of the participants were female. A teacher who 
perceives CS careers as more appropriate for White males 
may unintentionally not direct female students or students 
of color towards such careers. Therefore, it is important 
to help preservice teachers to be aware of their CS ste-
reotypes and to train them for more inclusive teaching 
practice. As a starting point, CS education training for 
early childhood preservice teachers can include opportuni-
ties to inform them about stereotypical beliefs in CS and 
to advocate for the notion that all students can succeed 
in CS. As Olsson and Martiny (2018) asserted, exposure 
to counter-stereotypical role models can possibly change 
people’s aspirations in life. Therefore, such training can 
be provided by professionals who are counter-stereotypical 
examples (e.g., a female computer scientist) in the society.
544
TechTrends (2022) 66:539–546
1 3
Directions for Future Research
This study expands the literature on CS education by explor-
ing early childhood preservice teachers’ perceptions of CS 
and their gender stereotypes in CS. Preservice teachers’ 
dispositions contribute to the successful development and 
buy-ins of CS education programs (Butler & Leahy, 2021). 
Therefore, how early childhood preservice teachers perceive 
CS, their stereotypical beliefs in CS, coding and its inte-
gration in early childhood education are important, particu-
larly towards designing and implementing age-appropriate, 
gender-inclusive CS education in early school years. The 
findings of this study acknowledged the importance of pro-
viding training to early childhood preservice teachers, not 
only to get them familiar with general CS concepts but also 
to show how to integrate CS concepts in their future teach-
ing and how to design and implement gender-inclusive CS 
education activities. Therefore, future research, especially 
longitudinal research, is needed to investigate the long-term 
effects of CS education initiatives targeting early childhood 
preservice teachers and how participation in such initiatives 
translates into more inclusive CS teaching practices in early 
childhood education. Longitudinal studies can also offer 
insights regarding the relationship between one’s disposed 
beliefs acquired through surveys and interviews, and their 
actions and implementations in the classroom once they 
become a teacher.
Although participants did not report prevalent gender ste-
reotypes in CS, many of them showed indications of a cer-
tain level of stereotypical notions (e.g., depicting a computer 
scientist as a White male). Various factors may contribute 
to developing such stereotypical notions, including but not 
limited to lack of knowledge or long-term exposure to stere-
otypical examples and role models through different venues 
(e.g., news, movies, etc.). As an initial step, future research 
should explore the underlying reasons for early childhood 
preservice teachers’ stereotypical beliefs in CS. Another ave-
nue for future research can examine the effects of exposure 
to the counter-stereotypical role models on early childhood 
preservice teachers’ CS stereotypes and their CS teaching 
practices. Such exposure should introduce early childhood 
preservice teachers to diverse roles from the CS field and 
emphasize the importance of including female students in 
CS education at a young age. Further, this study did not 
include any male preservice teachers, so future research can 
also explore if such stereotypical beliefs and the effects of 
exposure to counter-stereotypical role models differ across 
male and female early child preservice teachers.
Lastly, early childhood preservice teachers in this study 
did not have strong negative or positive dispositions towards 
coding and integrating coding in early childhood education. 
In addition to lack of CS knowledge and skills, other fac-
tors (e.g., motivation, self-efficacy, perceived value) may 
have contributed to this outcome. Therefore, future research 
should investigate factors that might influence early child-
hood preservice teachers’ perceptions of coding and its inte-
gration in early childhood education. Additionally, future 
research can investigate whether ongoing engagement with 
CS activities (e.g., robotics programming), particularly 
designed for early childhood education, helps preservice 
teachers develop more positive dispositions towards coding 
and its integration in early childhood education.
Study Limitations
There are several limitations to this study. First, due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the data were collected online, limit-
ing our ability to supervise the data collection process. For 
example, it was not possible to confirm whether participants 
communicated to each other as they were drawing their com-
puter scientists. Next, with open-response items, it was not 
possible to ask follow up questions based on the answers 
participants provided. Semi-structured individual interviews 
with each participant would have provided more in-depth 
information that could help us understand the underlying 
factors for their stereotypical beliefs. Lastly, all of the par-
ticipants in this study were female. Therefore, the findings 
may not reflect male early childhood teachers’ perceptions 
and stereotypical beliefs in CS, or their perceptions of cod-
ing for early childhood education.
Declarations 
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest. 
Research Involving Human Participants and/or Animals All procedures 
performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance 
with the ethical standards of the institutional research committee and 
with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or com-
parable ethical standards. 
Informed Consent Informed consent was obtained from all individual 
participants included in the study.
