https://doi.org/10.1177/0044118X20982314
Youth & Society
2022, Vol. 54(4) 593 –610
© The Author(s) 2020
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions 
DOI: 10.1177/0044118X20982314
journals.sagepub.com/home/yas
Article
‘It’s About the Way 
I’m Treated’: Afro-
Latina Black Identity 
Development in the 
Third Space
Jomaira Salas Pujols1
Abstract
Through an ethnographic study of an afterschool program serving girls of 
color in the New York City metro area, this study examines how girls who 
are ethically Latina and racially Black embrace and articulate AfroLatinx 
identity. It asks, what are the contexts and institutional processes that 
facilitate the development of a Black identity among Latina youth? I find 
that while the Latinx home and school contexts produce a mestiza identity 
that erases and subjugates Blackness, study participants find viable and 
affirming representations of Afro-Latinidad through their participation in 
this afterschool program. Specifically, I argue that the programs’ Black staff 
members and social justice-centered curriculum produces an increased 
identification with Blackness among Latina youth. Understanding how 
Afro-Latina girls learn to embrace their Black identity challenges us to 
examine how to leverage curriculum and pedagogy to affirm the racial 
identities of all Black girls.
Keywords
education, racial/ethnic identity, identity, race/ethnicity, Latino
1Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
Corresponding Author:
Jomaira Salas Pujols, Department of Sociology, Rutgers University, 26 Nichol Avenue, New 
Brunswick, NJ 08901-8554, USA. 
Email: jomairasalas@gmail.com
982314 YASXXX10.1177/0044118X20982314Youth & SocietySalas Pujols
review-article2020
594 
Youth & Society 54(4)
Introduction: On the Production of an Afro-Latina 
Youth Identity
The big chart paper in the front of the room read,
“we don’t know what afro-latino is because schools only teach that there is 
only black, white or latinos. They don’t teach where they intersect. There are 
different types of Black, culturally (caribbean, african).”
I must have been helping another group when the students wrote this 
because by the time I saw it they had moved on to another prompt. It was a 
typical hot summer day alleviated by the fact that we held our workshops in 
a basement. Still, the lack of sunlight made it difficult to keep track of time. 
“Alright let’s come back together y’all” I said, as the girls put down their 
markers and made their way to a circle of chairs arranged in the middle of 
the room. I had been leading a workshop where they could learn about 
Black artists and activists that are seldom taught in schools. Among Black 
figures like Audre Lorde I had included Miriam Jiménez Román, the co-
founder of the Afro-Latin@ Forum, along with the prompt: “What do you 
know about Afro-Latinidad?” As I watched them grapple with this ques-
tion, it was immediately clear that the majority of nashers, as we call par-
ticipants—all of them only a couple of days into our summer program—were 
not familiar with the term.
As a facilitator at the Sadie Nash Leadership Project, a community-based 
organization serving high-school aged girls and gender-expansive youth of 
color, I became curious about how the young people made sense of their 
racial identity. Specifically, I began to wonder why some nashers who were 
phenotypically Black and ethnically Latinx left the program self-identifying 
as Afro-Latinx, even if they were not previously familiar with the term. 
Miriam Jiménez Román and Juan Flores define Afro-Latinx identity as “those 
Latin@s of visible or self-proclaimed African descent” (Jiménez Román & 
Flores, 2010, p. 4). This suggests that regardless of whether Latinxs racially 
identity as Black, those with visible Black phenotypes navigate the world as 
Afro-Latinxs. This is increasingly important in the study of identity and 
inequality within Latinx communities, since social scientists agree that 
although race is socially constructed, its meaning has real consequences for 
how people move through the world (Omi & Winant, 1994). After complet-
ing Sadie Nash programming, the Latinx nashers in this study seemed to 
adopt this definition of Afro-Latinidad and Black Latinidad—terms I use 
interchangeably to refer to the embodied experience of navigating the world 
as a Black Latinx.
Salas Pujols 
595
Anti-Blackness is endemic to every institution in the United States 
(Hartman, 1997; Wilderson, 2010). Yet, its pervasiveness is not restricted 
to U.S. borders, as scholars have demonstrated how legacies of coloniza-
tion and imperialism in Latin America have made anti-Blackness a foun-
dational aspect of Latinx identity formation (Jiménez Román & Flores, 
2010). Research has long documented how Latinx households maintain 
the ideology of mestizaje, or race mixing (Wade, 1993), through practices 
that encourage young people to reject Black identity (Hordge-Freeman & 
Veras, 2019). Afro-Latinx youth then, encounter anti-Blackness every-
where, from schools (Dumas, 2016), to the home (Cruz-Janzen, 2001), to 
the neighborhoods they live in (Shedd, 2015). So, what is it about the 
particular context of Sadie Nash that produces an increased identification 
with Blackness among Latina youth?
I take up this question in a study of how multiple educational contexts 
inform the racial identities of Afro-Latina girls ages 15 to 20. Through an 
ethnographic study of 20 Afro-Latinas at Sadie Nash, I examine how this 
community-based educational space (CBES) promotes the Black Latinx 
identity development of high school-aged Latinas. Specifically, I draw on 
previous work on CBES (Baldridge, 2019; Brown, 2013; Ginwright, 2007; 
Gutiérrez, 2008) to show how Sadie Nash’s position as a CBES, allows it 
to contextualize and affirm Black Latinx identity in ways that Latinx fami-
lies and NYC and Newark public schools often fail to do. I argue that the 
development of a positive Afro-Latinx identity has critical implications for 
the healthy adolescent development of these girls, as they learn to valorize 
and celebrate an identity they already embody (Jiménéz Román & Flores, 
2010; Llorens, 2018). Additionally, I argue that Afro-Latina girls who 
embrace and are proud of their Black identity are better positioned to chal-
lenge anti-Blackness and engage in their own projects of Black Latina 
girlhood self-makings.
Blackness as a Problem for Latinidad
Mestizaje is a pervasive and enduring factor in Latin American racial ideol-
ogy. Although narratives of mestizaje claim that Latinxs have “transcended” 
race to become a “perfect mix” of white, Black, and “Indio,” it remains a 
deeply hierarchical system, one where blanqueamiento or racial whitening, is 
privileged (Wade, 1993, p. 21). Due to the privileging of the white mestizo, 
Black Latinxs in Latin America often exist outside the borders of Latinidad. 
For example, scholars have documented how Black Latinxs are often assumed 
to be migrants who come from elsewhere (the coasts, the Caribbean, Haiti), 
and never fully Latinx (Hernández, 2003; Llorens, 2018). As a result, studies 
596 
Youth & Society 54(4)
show that many Latinxs reject Black/white racial categories in favor of a 
racialized “Latinx” category even as the U.S. Census insists that Latinx is an 
ethnicity (Roth, 2012).
When trying to make sense of Latinx racial identity, it is important to 
account for how colonial and imperial legacies have shaped racial projects in 
Latin America. For example, in the Dominican Republic, national elites pur-
posefully distanced the nation from Haiti in order to avert the sanctions and 
surveillance enacted on the first free Black nation (Garcia-Peña, 2016). The 
Dominican national project then, has relied on the covert and overt suppres-
sion of Blackness for its full realization (Garcia-Peña, 2016). The conse-
quences of mestizaje racial projects like those found in the Dominican 
Republic make Blackness an often unviable, undesirable, and dangerous 
racial category for Latinxs.
In response, mestiza identity is carefully constructed in the Latinx home 
through messages about “bettering the race” (Hordge-Freeman & Veras, 
2019; Jiménez Román & Flores, 2010) and informal lessons about personal 
grooming and relationship choices (Candelario, 2007; Cruz-Janzen, 2001). 
Yet, despite these enduring practices, some Latinx do claim and value their 
Blackness. Scholarship suggests that education, and in particular, conscienti-
zation campaigns can help foster Black identity among Latinxs (Llorens, 
2018). For some Latinxs, educational spaces like universities can be places 
where they explore Black Latinidad and challenge the myth of mestizaje 
(Haywood, 2017; García-Louis, 2020; Hordge-Freeman & Veras, 2019). Yet, 
the realities of the U.S. education system suggest that Afro-Latinxs are also 
likely to encounter these anti-Black messages at school.
Anti-Blackness and Identity Development in 
Schools
Christina Sharpe argues that anti-Blackness is so inescapable that it is “as 
pervasive as the climate” (Sharpe, 2016, pp. 104–106). Although non-Black 
Latinxs confront racism in the United States, this racism is different from the 
anti-Black racism experienced by Black people, including Black Latinxs, due 
to the construction of Blackness as outside of humanity (Hartman, 1997; 
Wilderson, 2010). This construction of Blackness as non-human means that 
Black people are always assumed to be property that needs to be disciplined, 
technologies that are disproportionately applied to Black youth in education 
(Dumas & Ross, 2016; Shange, 2019). Black youth, for example, encounter 
culturally irrelevant curriculums (Ladson-Billings, 1995) and disproportion-
ate punishment and surveillance (Shange, 2019; Shedd, 2015) in schools, 
facing so many insidious and alarming technologies of anti-Blackness that 
Salas Pujols 
597
Dumas has theorized schools as “sites of Black suffering” where “the Black 
is constructed as always already problem—as nonhuman; inherently unedu-
cable, or at very least, unworthy of education” (Dumas, 2016, p. 16). This 
positioning of anti-Blackness as foundational to educational policy and prac-
tice has had devastating consequences for Black students, and as I later argue, 
for the Black racial identity of Afro-Latina girls.
If young people primarily draw from their home and schooling experi-
ences to develop their racial and ethnic identities (Umaña-Taylor et al., 
2014), what lessons about the meaning and value of Black identity are they 
taught in schools? Ruth Nicole Brown argues that Black girls experience 
“pervasive nonrecognition” in schools, where compliance is valued above 
all else (Brown, 2013, p. 100). In this context, Black girls learn to attach 
negative meaning to their Blackness, where their identities are always 
dehumanized.
Yet, Black youth don’t only navigate schools, they also draw from their 
experiences in other spaces to make sense of their Blackness. In her study of 
West Indian girls in New York City, Oneka LaBennett argues that participants 
draw from their experiences in different museums to understand the racial 
landscape of the city, where “white” museums are better resourced than the 
ones in their Black neighborhoods (LaBennett, 2011). Anti-Blackness then, 
becomes a primary lens through which Black youth are forced to make sense 
of their Black identity, and yet, they can also draw from other experiences to 
negotiate, resist, and developing affirming alternative narratives.
Fostering Critical Consciousness in Third Spaces
The “third space” refers to spaces where students and adults draw on their 
own experiences to co-create positive learning environments centered on col-
laboration (Gutiérrez, 2008). Typically envisioned as “third spaces” CBES 
function differently than schools because they are not always subjected to the 
same strict curriculums (Eccles & Gootman, 2002; Gutiérrez, 2008; Rogoff 
et al., 2016). As a result, many youth of color turn to CBES as alternatives to 
the racist and anti-Black practices found in schools (Baldridge, 2019; 
Ginwright, 2007). Although the landscape of youth programs can vary 
greatly, with some CBES engaging in neoliberal practices (Baldridge, 2019), 
others attempt to disrupt racist patterns by fostering the “critical conscious-
ness” of youth of color (Ginwright & Cammarota, 2002; Kwon, 2008; 
Ventura, 2017). Freire (1996) defined “conscientizacao” or consciousness as 
the ability to “perceive oppression not as a closed world from which there is 
no exit, but as a limiting situation which they can transform” (p. 31). For 
Black youth in particular, critical consciousness becomes an important 
598 
Youth & Society 54(4)
pathway to critique systems of oppression and tap into their agency to pro-
mote social change (Ginwright, 2007).
CBES are uniquely positioned to function as third spaces because they 
have more curricular flexibility than schools, offering staff members more 
latitude in curriculum development, more time to dedicate to informal check-
ins with young people, and less emphasis on controlling student movement 
(Rogoff et al., 2016). CBES are also well-positioned to foster positive rela-
tionships between peers (Wiggins, 2018) and to enact practices that allow 
them to foster “authentic youth-adult partnerships” (Medina et al., 2020).
When Black youth develop a critical consciousness, “politicized racial 
identities” also emerge (Ginwright, 2007, pp. 412, 413). As they reframe 
“personal challenges into political issues” Ginwright writes, Black youth feel 
empowered to “critique and resist the status quo” (Ginwright, 2007, p. 413). 
Considering the multitude of anti-Black messages and practices Black youth 
encounter, CBES that foster critical consciousness can offer young people 
affirming narratives about Black identity. For Afro-Latinxs youth who grow 
up with the ideology of mestizaje at home and experience anti-Blackness at 
school, these third spaces offer critical insight into how different educational 
contexts produce specific racial identities.
Methods
Fieldsite
As soon as you enter Sadie Nash, you realize that you’re not in school. The 
walls are filled with posters from past workshops. An image with the words 
“Free Bresha” referencing Bresha Meadows, a Black girl who was incarcer-
ated for killing her abusive father, is prominently displayed in the Newark 
office. The chairs are set up in a circle, with a few cushions and blankets 
mixed in for those that prefer to sit on the floor. The Sadie Nash Leadership 
Project, a CBES serving teenage girls and gender expansive youth of color in 
New York City and Newark, New Jersey was founded with the goal of pro-
moting leadership and social justice activism among high school-aged youth. 
Through five core programs, Sadie Nash staff foster the critical conscious-
ness of participants by conducting workshops where nashers learn about how 
issues of power, racism, and heterosexism impact their lives. At the end of 
every program, nashers create their own social justice projects where they 
address these issues in their communities. Staff and volunteers are also 
trained in these core principles of critical consciousness and activism through 
workshops and professional development trainings. Most critically, these 
adults are encouraged to tap into their own experiences so that they can 
Salas Pujols 
599
co-foster an environment centered around the power and knowledge already 
held by young people. This attention to critical consciousness and activism 
places Sadie Nash among a small group of CBES that encourage young peo-
ple to critique and dismantle the oppressive systems that shape their lives 
(Baldridge, 2019; Ginwright & Cammarota, 2002).
Data for this study come from weekly participant observations of Sadie 
Nash programming in Newark and NYC. Specifically, I gathered data on its 
Sisterhood and Summer Institute programs because they serve as nashers’ 
first entry point into the organization. During the school year, a group of 15 
to 20 young people who join Sisterhood meet once a week for 2 hours to dis-
cuss topics related to power, inequality, and social justice. In the summer, 
Summer Institute runs for 6-weeks but meets every weekday. Here two 
cohorts of 15 nashers participate in a core class whose curriculum overlaps 
with the Sisterhood curriculum. Although all Sadie Nash workshops have one 
facilitator and a “dean,” who is a typically a college student, co-lead these 
sessions, I became the third co-facilitator in these spaces while collecting 
data for this study.
Positionality
As a young, Black, light-skin Latina with a Spanish accent, nashers often 
came to me with questions or thoughts about Afro-Latinidad. This triple iden-
tity of researcher, co-facilitator, and Black Latina had important implications 
for my fieldwork. I knew that my identity coupled with my existing role as a 
volunteer at Sadie Nash meant that I couldn’t, as Aimee Cox describes, “just 
sit there and take notes” (Cox, 2015, p. 35). This meant being an active co-
facilitator by helping lead activities, set up and clean up the room, and engag-
ing in informal conversations with nashers. Additionally, recognizing how 
often researchers enter field sites with the idea that they are “saving” com-
munities, I paid close attention to how my weekly trips to Sadie Nash helped 
me cope with and navigate my own graduate school experiences. As Ruth 
Nicole Brown argues, my research wasn’t about “saving the girls” but about 
“saving [my]self” (Brown, 2013, p. 43). Being in this in-between space of 
researcher and Black girl, meant taking responsibility not only for accurate 
data collection but also for co-creating a space where Black girls, including 
myself, could authentically show up.
Participants
Taking up the definition of Afro-Latinxs as “those Latin@s of visible or self-
proclaimed African descent” (Jiménez Román & Flores, 2010, p. 4), I 
600 
Youth & Society 54(4)
recruited study participants through a two-tier process. First, I asked for con-
sent and assent forms from all nashers. This allowed me to record observa-
tions from Latina youth who did and did not identify as Black at the beginning 
of the program. Months later, I recruited interview participants who self-
identified as Black Latina or Afro-Latina. I use the terms Black Latina and 
Afro-Latina interchangeably because they refer to people who are both Black 
and Latinx and because these are the terms that nashers and staff members 
used to refer to Black Latinx people.
In total, 14 interviewees were current program participants while six were 
recent Sadie Nash alumni. Additionally, 13 participated in Sadie Nash’s New 
York City office while seven were from Newark. All but two participants had 
parents who were both Latinxs (the others had one African American and one 
Latinx parent) and eleven identified as Dominican, seven as Puerto Rican, 
one Panamanian, and one Colombian. I use pseudonyms throughout this 
paper to protect the anonymity of all participants, including nashers and staff 
members.
Data collection and analysis. In addition to ethnographic observations, I also 
collected and analyzed workshop materials such as concept maps where 
nashers brainstormed their ideas about race. Additionally, I conducted in-
depth interviews with 20 Sadie Nash participants and alumni. These inter-
views gave me an opportunity to inquire about observations or patterns 
observed in the field. All field notes, workshop materials, and interviews 
were analyzed using flexible coding methods in NVivo (Deterding & 
Waters, 2018). I then categorized these codes into sub-themes based on 
repetition and salience.
Limitations
Previous research shows how particular places “produce” certain types of 
racial and ethnic identities and the NYC metro area is no different due to its 
position as a place of encounter for many Black ethnic groups (Hunter & 
Robinson, 2018; LaBennett, 2011). The NYC metro area boasts a vibrant and 
diverse Latinx population. In addition to having significant Afro-Latinxs 
(Jiménez Román & Flores, 2010), residential segregation also means that 
these groups are likely to live amongst and go to school with African 
Americans and West Indians, leading Afro-Latinx youth to grow up in diverse 
Black cultural contexts (Ramos-Zayas, 2007). Because of these regional par-
ticularities, I do not claim that this study is generalizable to all Latinxs. 
Instead, my goal is to highlight the particular contexts in which Afro-Latinx 
identity emerges in NYC and Newark and to examine why Latina youth who 
Salas Pujols 
601
grow up in these cities do not articulate Black Latinx identity until they arrive 
at Sadie Nash. Additionally, while this study is not generalizable to non-
Black Latinx youth, it offers insight into the experiences of a group that has 
been understudied in Latinx literature: Afro-Latina girls.
Findings
Becoming Mestiza in the Latinx Home
The Latinx household is an important place where narratives of mestizaje and 
anti-Blackness are constructed, as Latinx youth are taught to straighten their 
hair, stay away from the sun, and choose romantic partners in ways that “bet-
ter the race” (Hordge-Freeman & Veras, 2019; Llorens, 2018). For the nash-
ers in this study, growing up in a Latinx household meant learning to become 
mestiza through grooming practices and informal lessons about Blackness 
always existing elsewhere. For example, many of the girls described feeling 
pressure to style their hair in ways that hid their Black features,
“Oh and when I decided that I wouldn’t straighten my hair anymore it was a 
problem. Scandalous [laughs]. My mom told me that I was embarrassing 
her. . . every time I would wear braids it was a problem.”
When Julissa began wearing her hair natural, her mother framed it as a trans-
gression of Latinx beauty norms. Because hair is a critical part of how 
Latinxs “do” mestizaje (Candelario, 2007), the young women in this study 
encountered extensive criticism from their families if they did not conform 
to beauty practices that hid their Blackness. In these families, “doing” their 
hair correctly meant, as Kara said, “hiding the kinks.” It is through these 
grooming practices, a pivotal ritual in Black girls’ experiences growing up 
that the Latina girls in this study learned that to become mestiza you had to 
become non-Black.
Interviews with nashers also reveal that disidentification with Blackness is 
taught through informal family conversations where Latinxs youth learn to 
distance themselves from Black identity. For example, Barbara, the daughter 
of an African American mother and Dominican father recalls how some fam-
ily members implied that she was not Latina enough because her mother is 
African American,
“My dad’s side has always just—they just identify as Dominican . . . And when 
I would come around they would make comments about my hair, or like the 
fact that my older sister is lighter skinned than me . . . even though some of 
them are the same or even darker than me [laughs]”
602 
Youth & Society 54(4)
Barbara illustrates how Black identity is framed as always outside of the 
perimeters of Latinidad regardless of what one looks like (Llorens, 2018). 
Dominican scholars have argued that colonial and imperial ideologies encour-
age misidentification with Black racial identity even among Dominicans who 
are phenotypically Black (Garcia-Peña, 2016). Hearing negative comments 
about her racial features from family members who “were darker than [her]” 
teaches young people like Barbara that you can look Black and still reject 
Black identity.
Jessica, a Dominican-American also described how her parents empha-
sized racial distinctions between themselves and other Black ethnic groups, 
“yeah my family was always very anti-Black. . .they always told me that I 
was like [pause] separate from Haitians or other Black people on our block.” 
Jessica’s reflection is representative of the mestizo ideologies that purpose-
fully distance Dominicans from Haitians, even as these groups share many 
phenotypical and cultural traits (García-Peña, 2016). Through these informal 
lessons, Latina youth like Jessica and Barbara learn to create distance between 
themselves and other Black groups, learning that Black Latinidad is an 
impossible and unviable racial category.
From the Kitchen Table to the Classroom: Invisibilizing Black 
Latinidad in Schools
Interviews with nashers reveal that schools reinforced these racial ideolo-
gies through the silencing of Afro-Latinidad in the curriculum. Research 
has long documented how the lack of culturally relevant curriculum in 
urban schools (Ladson-Billings, 1995) and increased focus on testing 
(Sojoyner, 2016) has deleterious effects on the academic engagement of 
Black youth by erasing their own histories from the curriculum. I extend 
these arguments by arguing that the lack of exposure to Black culture, his-
tory, and identity in urban schools also has implications for Black racial 
formation of Afro-Latina girls.
Nashers in NYC and Newark reported never having learned about 
Afro-Latinx figures, histories of Black people in Latin America, or Black 
Latinx issues in school. It is through these silences of Afro-Latinx iden-
tity in the curriculum that schools played a role in the production of a 
de-racialized Latinx identity. For example, when I asked nashers to talk 
about how their social justice perceptions might overlap with those of 
their peers at school Marisa, a light skin Afro-Latina, and Farah, the 
daughter of West African immigrants, quickly jumped in to recount an 
argument between her peers,
Salas Pujols 
603
“yeah, they told [our friend] that she can’t speak on colorism or racism cause 
she’s Dominican. . .and like that kinda stuff makes me so mad because her 
nationality has nothing to do with her race.”
Farah mentions that nationality “has nothing to do with [] race” to argue 
that her peers should understand why her Dominican friend has the author-
ity to speak about racism. Probing further, I asked why they thought that 
their peers had different viewpoints on race and ethnicity than they did, 
Marisa responded,
“[students] are taught to just focus on the strict curriculum and to avoid thinking 
outside of the lines. . . [the curriculum] is not flexible. . . so[students] don’t 
engage with the type of stuff (implying social justice issues) that we do here.”
Marisa critiques the narrow school curriculum for not exposing her peers to 
social justice issues that might promote more nuanced understandings of race 
and ethnicity. Specifically, she emphasizes that her school has not taught 
them to recognize that you can be Black and Dominican. By differentiating 
what they learn at Sadie Nash (social justice) from what they learn at school 
(“strict curriculum”), Farah and Marisa underscore previous research that 
argues that CBES can affirm the racialized identities of young people through 
more flexible and culturally-aware curriculum (Ginwright, & Cammarota, 
2002; Kwon, 2008).
Even when schools do engage with the histories and contexts of Black 
identity, they tend to do so through dehumanizing lenses (Dumas & ross, 
2016). “All we learned about was slavery” Chanice, an NYC nasher said, “we 
never learned about like the activists and the people who created change.” 
Here Chanice uncovers an important process through which schools dehu-
manize Black students’ identities. When schools barely incorporate Blackness 
into the curriculum except for a few token stories of Black oppression, they 
teach students that Black identity is undesirable and marginal. For Afro-
Latina girls, these lessons underscore the invisibility and negation of 
Blackness that they encounter at home further promoting their disidentifica-
tion with Black Latinidad.
Articulating Afro-Latinx Identity at Sadie Nash
In New York City alone more than 10.2 million children and young adults are 
involved in CBES, with Black and Latinx students being more likely to enroll 
than other youth (Afterschool Alliance, 2019; Afterschool Alliance, 2013). In 
what follows I analyze how Sadie Nash’s position as a third space enabled it 
604 
Youth & Society 54(4)
to foster the Black identity development of Afro-Latina youth. I argue that 
two elements of Sadie Nash were particularly important in these racial iden-
tity constructions: the racial identities of its youth workers and the curriculum 
and pedagogical strategies of the program.
Youth workers and the multiplicity of Black identity. Unlike too many urban 
schools, Sadie Nash has a very diverse staff with all youth workers identify-
ing as people of color and over 75% as members of the Black diaspora—
including African American, Caribbean, African, and Afro-Latinx. Research 
shows that when youth workers and youth share racial identities, they are 
able to develop more positive relationships (Nygreen et al., 2006). As I argue 
in this section, these benefits extend to racial formation where, through expo-
sure to Black staff members who embody the multiplicity of Black identity, 
Afro-Latina nashers find affirming models of Black Latinidad.
From Bushwick, Brooklyn to north Newark, the NYC metro area is full 
of Black people who speak Spanish. Yet, nashers reveal that Sadie Nash 
youth workers were often the first adults they met who articulated and cel-
ebrated Afro-Latinx identity. Amanda, a Puerto Rican nasher from New 
York City, says,
“[Afro-Latina staff member] was really helpful in [pause] in how I identify 
because she was always so proud of being Afro-Latina and she wasn’t like 
ashamed of it. . .so I realized that if she could be proud of who she was, I could 
too.”
Witnessing an Afro-Latina staff member be proud of her Black identity 
encouraged Amanda to identify with her own Blackness. Similarly, Amaya 
also recalled how her interactions with an Afro-Latina youth worker helped 
her understand and contextualize this identity,
“One of the staff members [when I was a nasher] was big on [Afro-Latinidad] 
and identified as an Afro-Latina and she was always talking about it . . . so she 
explained it to me but also the oppression of how we’re taught to hate that 
aspect of it. How we’re taught to hate our race . . . and that helped me 
understand why my family was always so against [self-identifying as Black]”
Amaya recalls how this Afro-Latinx staff member not only embodied Black 
Latinidad but also helped her understand why she grew up in family that 
discouraged this racial identity. Much like how developing a critical con-
sciousness helps young people reframe personal failures into political analy-
ses (Ginwright, 2007), Afro-Latinx staff members like the ones Amaya 
encountered, provided nashers with the tools to make sense of her family’s 
Salas Pujols 
605
(and perhaps her own initial) rejection of Afro-Latinidad by exposing her to 
knowledge about colonialism and racism in Latin America. As a result, Sadie 
Nash youth workers served as mentors who used curriculum and pedagogy to 
highlight the centrality of race in nashers’ lives.
Promoting critical consciousness and Afro-Latinx identity through curriculum. “As you 
can see, there are pieces of paper around the room that name one of our identi-
ties. I’m going to read off a prompt and I want you to stand next to the identity 
that answers that prompt for you.” Sam, an African American facilitator, was 
leading the group through one of the foundational activities in the Sisterhood 
curriculum: social identity walk. In this activity, nashers are asked to move 
around the room and select social identities that answer prompts like: “stand 
next to the identity that you think about the most” or “have the most questions 
about.” After reading each of the social identities out loud, Sam asked the group 
if they had any questions, but as the room fell silent, she (like all facilitators did) 
defined four terms: gender and sexuality, and race and ethnicity. “Race is about 
what you look like. It’s like the physical features that make someone ‘look’ 
white, or Black.” Sam continued, “ethnicity is like your culture, what you like to 
eat, what language you speak. So, for example, you can be racially Black, ethni-
cally Latinx, and from the Dominican Republic.” Although social scientists 
agree that race is socially constructed, there’s also widespread consensus that the 
arbitrary meanings attached to phenotype have real consequences (Omi & 
Winant, 1994). What Sam, Sadie Nash, and social scientists convey in saying 
that race is “about what you look like” is a sense of the lived experience of race, 
one that is grounded in how others perceive someone’s racial group membership 
and how they treat them based on this perception (Jiménez Román & Flores, 
2010; Omi & Winant, 1994). The social identity walk, then, as one of the first 
workshops in the Sisterhood and Summer Institute curriculums, sets the founda-
tion for a conceptualization of race and ethnicity that opens up space for reflect-
ing on the lived experience of Afro-Latinx identity.
In workshops, nashers learned terms, definitions, and facts about social 
inequality that made them increasingly aware of the lived experience of race 
and anti-Blackness in their lives. By developing “politicized identities” 
(Ginwright, 2007) where they connected their experiences to those of their 
Black non-Latinx peers, Afro-Latina nashers began to articulate their racial 
experiences. Nami, for example, said that learning about the school-to-prison 
pipeline helped her see herself as a Black girl,
“when [pause] when I think about the way I’m treated at school, [pause] I was 
always treated like my African Americans friends. . .like I was overly-
disciplined and overly like watched”
606 
Youth & Society 54(4)
Nami makes an explicit connection between her experience at school—that 
of being disciplined at similar rates as her African American peers—and her 
Black identity. She continues, “and that helped me understand that like yeah 
I can be Latina but I’m also Black. Because race is about how we’re treated.” 
In emphasizing that racial identity is an embodied experience, nashers like 
Nami used their treatment in school to think about what racial category they 
occupy. Research by Oneka LaBennett and Carla Shedd demonstrate that 
Black youth’s experiences in multiple educational spaces give them insight 
into their position in society (LaBennett, 2011; Shedd, 2015). Latinx nashers 
at Sadie Nash extend these racialized meanings to the very racial categories 
that have been made (un)available to them at home and school by creating 
and embracing Black Latinx identity.
Importantly, Latinx nashers also encountered affirming narratives about 
Black girlhood and Black Latinidad at Sadie Nash. In particular, Sadie Nash 
youth workers were intentional about exposing participants to a diversity of 
women of color activists who created change in their communities. For 
example, workshops included activities that introduced nashers to artists like 
Audre Lorde and Carrie Mae Weems, scholars like Miriam Jiménez Román 
and Kimberlé Crenshaw, and activists like Alicia Garza and Shirley Chisholm. 
These Black women not only represented the diversity of the Black experi-
ence but also served as examples of Black women who pursued their passions 
and worked toward creating better worlds. Through multiple representations 
of Black women, Sadie Nash’s curriculum and pedagogy not only encour-
aged Afro-Latina nashers to embrace their Black Latinidad but also to see it 
as something to be proud of and celebrate.
Conclusion
Scholarship about young people’s educational experiences tends to 
emphasize their school-based academic outcomes. Yet, young people 
learn a lot about who they are and how the world sees them through their 
educational experiences in and outside of schools. These racial identities 
and meanings have important implications for their identities and sense of 
belonging as well as their orientations towards challenging injustice 
(Ginwright, 2007; Ginwright & Cammarota, 2002). Hence, for the Afro-
Latina girls in this study, who experience anti-Blackness in school and 
mestizaje ideologies at home, CBES like Sadie Nash are powerful sites 
where they can explore and develop affirming narratives about their racial 
identity.
I have argued that Sadie Nash’s position as a third space enables Afro-
Latina girls to see and valorize Blackness as an increasingly central part of 
their lives. Specifically, I have identified two program strategies and practices. 
Salas Pujols 
607
First, I find that the racial makeup of its staff is significantly different than that 
of urban public schools. As a result, youth workers mirror the racial and ethnic 
backgrounds of nashers and model the diversity of the Black diaspora in 
important ways. Second, because Sadie Nash’s curriculum is centered on criti-
cal consciousness, participants are encouraged to explore and reflect on their 
racialized experiences. This attention to the lived experience of race fosters 
Afro-Latina girls’ reflections on how they move through the world. 
Additionally, because its curriculum incorporates overlooked Black women 
from the diaspora, Afro-Latina nashers learn to see themselves as part of a 
lineage of Black changemakers who celebrate and embrace their Blackness.
For Black Latinx youth who encounter anti-Blackness as “the climate,” 
(Sharpe, 2016) this is important for several reasons. First, I contend that 
Afro-Latina girls encounter invisibility and subjugation regardless of 
whether they self-identify as Black. This is often a source of dissonance 
for Afro-Latinx youth, who grow up with the emotional impact of anti-
Black policies and practices but without the concepts to name this experi-
ence (Hordge-Freeman & Veras, 2019). Thus, I suggest that Afro-Latina 
girls who see themselves as Black subjects are better positioned to make 
sense of these lived experiences. Second, Afro-Latina girls who embrace 
and celebrate their Afro-Latinidad may find community and healing along-
side other Black girls. Through these communities of care, Afro-Latina 
girls may be encouraged to challenge anti-Black racism, carrying mes-
sages of Black pride to their homes, schools, and other spaces they inhabit. 
Perhaps most critically, Afro-Latinas who know and embrace being Black 
are also positioned to create alternative narratives about Black Latina girl-
hood; thereby engaging in Black girl self-makings that reimagine a world 
that celebrates all that they are.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Zaire Dinzey-Flores, Ali Chaudhary, Naa Oyo Kwate, 
Mario Mercado-Diaz, Miari Stephens and the anonymous reviewers for their thought-
ful feedback on various drafts of the article.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article: This research was supported by National 
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program.
608 
Youth & Society 54(4)
ORCID iD
Jomaira Salas Pujols 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7584-2507
