Received: 9 November 2015
Revised: 20 June 2017
Accepted: 24 July 2017
DOI: 10.1002/sce.21305
L E A R N I N G
Justice-centered science pedagogy: A catalyst
for academic achievement and social
transformation
Daniel Morales-Doyle
Department of Curriculum and Instruction,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL,
60607, USA
Correspondence
DanielMorales-Doyle,DepartmentofCurriculum
andInstruction,UniversityofIllinoisatChicago,
1040W HarrisonStreet,M/C147,Chicago,IL
60607.
Email:moralesd@uic.edu
Abstract
Longstanding inequities in science education across the lines of
race and class remain the most intractable problem in the ﬁeld.
Justice-centered science pedagogy is introduced as a theoretical
framework built on the traditions of critical pedagogy and cultur-
ally relevant pedagogy to address these inequities as components
of larger oppressive systems. This study examines how a justice-
centered advanced chemistry class in an urban neighborhood high
school supported students to succeed academically while taking up
urgent issues of social and environmental justice identiﬁed by their
communities. The ﬁndings include evidence that curriculum orga-
nized around an issue of environmental racism supported academic
achievement that exceeded the expectations of a typical high school
chemistry course. The ﬁndings also document how the curricu-
lum provided opportunities for students to move beyond academic
achievement to position themselves as transformative intellectu-
als. As transformative intellectuals, students demonstrated complex
thinking about science and social justice issues, cultivated their com-
mitment to their communities and cultures of origin, and developed
credibility as local youth knowledgeable in science. These ﬁndings
have implications for teachers, teacher educators, and educational
researchers who wish to engage with science education as a catalyst
for social transformation.
K E Y W O R D S
critical pedagogy, culturally relevant science, equity in science edu-
cation, secondary chemistry, social justice
1
INTRODUCTION
In 2001, William Tate issued, “…an open invitation to the science education community to engage in social justice
issues and to treat the opportunity to learn science as a civil rights construct” (p. 1016). Tate's invitation was cou-
pled with warnings about the pitfalls of “raising standards” and “increasing accountability” as methods for engaging
Science Education. 2017;101:1034–1060.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/sce
c
⃝ 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
1034
MORALES-DOYLE
1035
in these issues. More than 15 years later, science teachers are faced with unprecedented levels of standardization and
accountability. Meanwhile, recent science education research acknowledges that the concept of social justice remains
undertheorized in the ﬁeld (Rivera Maulucci, 2012). More importantly, inequity across race, class, and gender remains
the most prevalent and persistent problem in science education.
Educational inequity is built into the politics, economics, and ideology of our society, so issues of equity in schools
are inextricably entangled with broader issues of social justice (Duncan-Andrade & Morrell, 2008; Noguera, 1996).
Given this reality, science educators have suggested engaging students in challenging social inequality through science
teaching and learning that prioritize social transformation (Barton, 2003; Rodriguez, 1998). In other words, equity
in science education will not be achieved through technical or isolated means, but by transforming it as one part of
the unjust societal context in which it occurs. Unfortunately, the literature lacks empirical analyses of socially trans-
formative science education enacted effectively in urban secondary schools. This study contributes such an analy-
sis by introducing justice-centered science pedagogy, a framework that addresses inequity in science education as
one component of oppression by challenging larger structures such as white supremacy, neoliberal capitalism, and
heteropatriarchy. While justice-centered science pedagogy encompasses curriculum, teaching practices, and class-
room structures, the focus of this study is an analysis of the development of “curricula with community members
that speak to local political, social, and economic conditions” and an analysis of student outcomes, including “criti-
cal academic skills that equip youth to create change” (Pulido, Cortez, Aviles de Bradley, Miglietta, & Stovall, 2013,
p. 85).
This study grapples with the complexities and contradictions of this work through a case study of a class I taught
at La Lucha High School.1 La Lucha is a public neighborhood school that was founded by a hunger strike protesting
an urban district's neglect of West Ridgevale, an economically marginalized Mexican community in a large city in the
Midwest United States. The school's design process and attendance boundaries also included East Ridgevale, an adja-
cent economically dispossessed African American community. Given the “subtractive schooling” (Valenzuela, 1999)
and “mis-education” (Woodson, 1933/2006) that has characterized the role of schools in communities like Ridgevale,
thisstudyisguided bythe following question:Howcancurriculum inanadvanced highschool chemistrycourse support
marginalized urban students to succeed academically while taking up urgent issues of social justice identiﬁed by their
communities? Answering this question requires consideration of whether and how a community identiﬁes a particular
problem as an urgent issue of social justice. I take up this consideration empirically, along with academic achievement
and other outcomes that emerged from the data.
1.1
Theoretical framework: Justice-centered science pedagogy
This study applies justice-centered science pedagogy, a framework that I put forth to build on critical pedagogy and cul-
turally relevant pedagogy, which are related traditions that theorize antioppressive education as a “catalyst” for social
transformation. In a chemical reaction, a catalyst provides an alternate mechanism that requires less activation energy,
so that the reaction proceeds more quickly or under conditions that are less severe. A chemical catalyst can also pro-
vide for greater selectivity with respect to products. Justice-centered science pedagogy extends the catalyst metaphor,
aiming to support alternate pathways for social transformation through science education. Due to the scarcity of sci-
ence education studies that rely on critical and culturally relevant pedagogies, I begin with a brief overview of the two
traditions that undergird my framework.
1.2
Two related transformative pedagogies
Ladson-Billings (1994) coined the term, “culturally relevant pedagogy,” to describe the work of effective teachers of
African American students. Justice-centered science pedagogy draws on Ladson-Billings’ (1995) concise deﬁnition of
culturally relevant pedagogy as “rest[ing] on three criteria or propositions: (a) students must experience academic
success, (b) students must develop and/or maintain cultural competence, and (c) students must develop a critical
consciousness through which they challenge the status quo of the current social order” (p. 160). The third criterion,
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1036
MORALES-DOYLE
critical consciousness, sets culturally relevant pedagogy apart from other frameworks that consider the role of culture
in learning. In this way, Ladson-Billings (1995, 1997) points out that culturally relevant pedagogy has much in common
with critical pedagogy, which is most often associated with the work of Paulo Freire. She notes that Freire's literacy
work in northeast Brazil was not unlike the work of African American freedom schools in the segregated south of the
United States. In his proliﬁc work, Freire emphasizes conscientização (best translated as conscientization), which aligns
with Ladson-Billings’ third criterion.
Conscientização is a process by which people come to view themselves as capable of transforming reality by elimi-
nating oppression. This process involves people understanding the historical and political conditions that created the
present inequitable social circumstances. The development of critical consciousness as an outcome of education con-
trasts sharply with schooling as the transmission of a canon of accepted knowledge or as the narrow development
of technical skills associated with economic development (Freire & Macedo, 1987). Conscientization occurs through
praxis, “the action and reﬂection of men and women upon their world in order to transform it” (Freire, 1970/2001, p.
2001).
Culturally relevant pedagogy and critical pedagogy are related traditions, one rooted in the Black freedom struggle
in the United States and the other emerging from revolutionary contexts in Latin America. Both theorize teaching as
a means to disrupt the historical function of schools as producers of social inequality. Justice-centered science peda-
gogy draws heavily from both traditions because of their varied emphases. By focusing on the praxis of social transfor-
mation and the development of critical consciousness, critical pedagogy guards against the tendency of many science
education frameworks to omit these concepts. Conversely, while critical pedagogy clearly values content teaching and
skill development, its emphasis on social transformation has led to frequent misunderstandings of critical pedagogy as
rejecting these aspects of schooling (Darder, 2002). By explicitly foregrounding academic achievement, culturally rel-
evant pedagogy avoids such misinterpretation and highlights the importance of equipping students to navigate main-
stream institutions. Considering these traditions in light of issues that have been examined in recent critical scholarship
in science education, justice-centered science pedagogy also draws on work that cautions against equity efforts that
do not value various ways of knowing and thus ultimately reproduce forms of assimilation and compliance (Bang and
Vossoughi, 2016).
1.3
Social justice science issues
Despite its promise for theorizing science education as a force for social change, very few science educators have taken
up critical pedagogy. An earlier issue of this journal provides an important exception as Brazilian science educator Dos
Santos (2009) provides a framework for Freirean scientiﬁc literacy. Dos Santos describes his framework as a radical
extension of the humanistic approach articulated by Aikenhead (2006). Dos Santos brings Freire's problem-posing edu-
cation into science education by positioning socioscientiﬁc issues (SSI) as analogous to generative words. For Freire,
generative words were the starting point for literacy instruction. These words emerge from generative themes, which
are issues of social injustice that are important to students and their communities. Problem-posing educators use gen-
erative themes to organize curricula that “re-present” these themes as problems for students and teachers to address
together. Thus, Dos Santos suggests that science curriculum development may begin from key social issues in students’
lives as they intersect with natural, scientiﬁc, or technological phenomena.
Problem-posing education is different from “problem-based learning,” which was developed by medical educa-
tors and has been extended to other school contexts, including secondary science education (Barrows, 1986; Hung,
Jonasssen, & Liu, 2008). In a similar way, Dos Santos’ work is a departure from previous SSI frameworks (Zeidler,
Sadler, Simmons, & Howes, 2005). All of these approaches contextualize science learning within “real world prob-
lems,” but problem-posing education is explicitly political and seeks to understand and eradicate social domination
and inequality by addressing it in local contexts. In this view, problems cannot be fully understood or addressed
apart from understanding and addressing oppression. To make this distinction, justice-centered science pedagogy
uses the term “social justice science issues” (SJSI) to describe SSI that are also generative themes in a given
context.
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1037
1.4
Antiracist and equitable science education
In making the politics of SJSI explicit, justice-centered science pedagogy leans heavily on Freire's work while also fol-
lowing other critical pedagogueswhoemphasize the centralityofrace and racism, gender and sexism, and the economic
exploitation of capitalism in structuring society and schools (Cammarota & Romero, 2014; hooks, 1994; Stovall, 2006).
Developing an analysis of white supremacy is important because science is often positioned as objective even as the
“theoretical retroﬁtting of scientiﬁc racism” has worked to justify oppression from slavery and colonialism through
current educational inequality (Brown & Mutegi, 2010). While it may be tempting to think of these issues as historical
relics, a recent popular book provides evidence that scientiﬁc racism endures (Wade, 2014) and recent research sug-
gests that mainstream science education continues to subtly perpetuate the misunderstandings of race that undergird
it (Donovan, 2014).
It is within this context that Mutegi (2011) considers curriculum reforms that aim to achieve “science for all” as rep-
resentative of the prevailing curricular approach, which he identiﬁes as a cultural transmission model. He argues that
this approach is inadequate and potentially harmful for African American students because the culture transmitted,
that of Western science, has worked to maintain their oppression. As an alternative, Mutegi also draws on Freire's work
to describe a “socially transformative curriculum” for African American students, which has ﬁve goals: mastery of West-
ern science standards, critical awareness, racial awareness, conscientization, and praxis. While Mutegi emphasizes that
the social circumstances of people of African descent are unique, the theoretical stances in his work illuminate the
application of critical pedagogy to science education more broadly. Speciﬁcally, by valuing the mastery of Western sci-
ence standards, Mutegi addresses a common misunderstanding of critical pedagogy as not preparing students to nav-
igate sanctioned forms of knowledge and formal educational institutions (Darder, 2002). At the same time, Mutegi's
prioritization of racial awareness addresses a common critique of critical pedagogy as failing to deal with issues of race
(Ladson-Billings, 1997). Justice-centered science pedagogy draws on and extends these emphases of socially transfor-
mative curriculum to theorize their relationship to the educational outcomes of youth who learn science by addressing
SJSI. Understanding SJSI requires both teachers and students to develop an analysis of racism in manifestations such
as environmental racism (Bullard, Mohai, Saha, & Wright, 2008), scientiﬁc racism (Brown & Mutegi, 2010), and medical
apartheid (Washington, 2006), among others.
1.5
Youth as transformative intellectuals
It is important for students to master and critique sanctioned forms of scientiﬁc knowledge to fully participate in edu-
cational institutions and society as they currently exist. But imagining science education as a catalyst for social change
suggests more than simply engaging with science as it currently exists. Bang and Vossoughi (2016) posit that social
change:
involves the interweaving of structural critiques with the enactment of alternative forms of here-and-now activ-
ity that open up qualitatively distinct social relations, forms of learning, and knowledge development, and con-
tribute to the intellectual thriving and well-being of students, teachers, families, and communities. (p. 175)
In this quote, Bang and Vossoughi, imply a relationship between the academic, cultural, and critical in Ladson-
Billings’ framework. But they also suggest that “Without expansive views [of epistemic heterogeneity], equity work
becomes directed towards more effective forms of compliance and participation in inequitable systems and forms of
life” (p. 175). Bang and Vossoughi build on previous work (Bang & Medin, 2010; Rosebery, Ogonowski, DiSchino, &
Warren, 2010) to argue that valuing Indigenous and other subaltern ways of knowing is necessary if science education
is to engage marginalized students in ways that are transformative rather than assimilative.
Justice-centered science pedagogy draws on these assertions and the work of other critical pedagogues in posi-
tioning youth as transformative intellectuals. This notion is an extension of the working class “organic intellectual,” or
a thinker who remains grounded in the working class (Gramsci, 1971/2014). Practitioner researchers in U.S. urban
schools have conceived of working class students of color as transformative intellectuals capable of leading social
transformation (Duncan-Andrade and Morrell, 2008; Romero, 2014). One of the strategies for developing youth as
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1038
MORALES-DOYLE
transformative intellectuals is to engage in Youth Participatory Action Research (YPAR) (Cammarota & Fine, 2008).
YPAR relies mostly on social science research methodologies, but recent work suggests that opening the tools of other
disciplines to more participatory approaches is a promising strategy for science education (Bang and for addressing
Vossoughi, 2016) and for addressing problems of public and environmental health (Balasz & Morello-Frosch, 2013;
Corburn, 2005). YPAR is difﬁcult to enact in the context of a science course for various reasons, including that:
In the everyday world of a community, science emerges not as a coherent, objective, and unproblematic body
of knowledge and practices. Rather, science often turns out to be uncertain, contentious, and unable to answer
important questions pertaining to the speciﬁc (local) issues at hand. (Roth & Barton, 2004, p. 7)
Therefore, an authentically participatory science requires the sort of epistemic heterogeneity espoused by Bang
and Vossoughi, which involves valuing local knowledge and the ways of knowing that Indigenous or marginalized peo-
ple bring to the process of research. YPAR challenges notions of objectivity and expertise that have been central to
Western science. It also rejects knowledge generation for the purposes of dominating nature or even for its own sake.
Instead, it reframes the goal of understanding the world as part of creating more just and sustainable social conditions.
Bang, Warren, Rosebery, and Medin (2013) argue that fostering transformative science experiences for marginalized
youth is essential to creating new types of knowledge and viewpoints that will be required to address the most vex-
ing SJSI. Justice-centered science pedagogy is aligned with this belief in marginalized youth to be the transformative
thinkers who can help us imagine alternate mechanisms for social change.
2
METHODS
This article presents a case study of an AP chemistry class that I taught at La Lucha High School. In a departure from
case study methods typically found in educational research, this study applies the extended case method, a reﬂexive
ethnographic approach that deﬁnes the case and considers the context differently from more positivistic case method-
ologies. The extended case method relies on four extensions (Burawoy, 2009) that guided this project. First, by con-
ducting teacher research, I extended myself beyond the role of observer to being a full participant. The role of my own
worldview and actions were explicitly considered as important factors throughout the study. Second, the retrospective
design of this case study extends observations across space and time. I have deﬁned the case simply as one AP chem-
istry class, but this second extension prompted me to analyze relevant events and reﬂections that occurred before this
class began and after it ended, from the origins of the curriculum to the students’ reﬂections looking back on the class
as college students. Third, rather than looking for common patterns across multiple cases, phenomena were extended
from the case and out into the larger context to understand the impact of external forces. As described below, the
school context was especially important to consider explicitly. The fourth and ﬁnal extension is the reconstruction of
theory based on conﬁrmations, disconﬁrmations, and nuances in the data.
Rather than universal knowledge, teacher research generates lessons-learned, context-speciﬁc possibilities, and
frameworks that are useful in other contexts (Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 2009). Similarly, case studies do not general-
ize to populations, but rather produce in-depth knowledge that allows for “analytic generalization” (Yin, 2009). Bura-
woy (1998) warns of the limitations of the extended case method, which he attributes to the unavoidable effects of
power between the researcher and other participants in the case. The retrospective design of this mitigated some of
the effects of power because I was no longer the students’ teacher (with power to assign grades) at the time of the
interviews. Of course, conducting the interviews after the conclusion of the class and after students graduated intro-
duces other limitations with respect to time and memory. Students’ reﬂections on the class are thus tempered by time
but also contextualized by their experiences since. Keeping in mind limitations of power and time, my aim is to provide
sufﬁcient context, thick description, and disclosure of my own viewpoint so that the concrete examples and recon-
struction of theory presented here may inform the reinvention of justice-centered science pedagogy in other contexts.
Practitioner research validity criteria (Anderson & Herr, 1999) were used to maximize the trustworthiness of this study
with an eye toward local and broader impact.
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1039
TABLE 1
Demographic comparison of school, case study class, and participants
Demographic Group
La Lucha High School
(325 Students) (%)
AP Chemistry Class
(29 Students) (%)
Study Participants
(Nine Students) (%)
African American students
10
10
11
Latinx students
89
90
89
Students receiving free or reduced lunch
96
100a
100a
Female students
51b
59
56
Male students
49b
41
44
aAs determined by students who received a fee waiver for the AP exam, which requires eligibility for free or reduced lunch.
bGender demographics for the school represent an average of state report card information, which only includes 11th Graders,
for the year of the case study class and the year prior, which captures all of the students eligible to enroll in the case study class.
2.1
School and class context
In a design process that followed the hunger strike that founded La Lucha High School, the Ridgevale community explic-
itly charged the school with upholding the values of that struggle. These values are spelled out in the mission and vision
statements of the school that align with the tenets of critical and culturally relevant pedagogies. La Lucha High School
has been an exception to U.S. schools that have systematically failed to provide equitable access to AP classes for
African American and Latinx students (Solorzano & Ornelas, 2004). At the same time, tension exists between the highly
prescribed AP chemistry curriculum and the ﬂexibility required by the community-responsive charge of the hunger
strike. Thus, an AP chemistry course at La Lucha High School represented a revelatory case (Yin, 2009) to examine
and theorize about tensions between standards and locally responsive science education (Aikenhead, Barton, & Chinn,
2006). The syllabus for the class was approved by the College Board's AP audit process. But unlike many AP classes,
students were not excluded from this class based on GPA or test scores. The 20 11th Graders and nine 12th Graders
in the class mirrored the demographics of the school as a whole. The demographics of the school, the class, and the
students who participated in this study are summarized in Table 1.
2.2
Data sources and participants
The data sources fell into three categories: interview data, student-submitted artifacts, and my archival data. Partic-
ipants were recruited through emails sent to all 29 students and a handful of community members approximately 15
months after the conclusion of the class. Semistructured interviews (recorded and transcribed) were conducted with
nine students and three other stakeholders approximately 18 months after the conclusion of the class. There were 63
items in the interview protocol, not all of which were asked of every participant. Items included general prompts about
students’ lives, communities, and the meanings they attached to terms like “social justice” and “environmental justice.”
Some examples of more general prompts include: “Tell me about your family and community,” and “What do you think
is the role of science in our society?” There were also more speciﬁc questions about the course, the curriculum, and stu-
dents’ experiences in and preparation for college, such as: “What work are you most proud of from the course? What
about this particular assignment or project made you proud?”
The nine student participants include one African American woman (Jade), four Latina women (Marisol, Cristina,
Raquel, and Odette), and four Latino men (Francisco, Curtis, Gabriel, and Jackson). Among these nine participants, ﬁve
were in 11th Grade and four were in 12th Grade during the case study class. Seven also took an introductory chem-
istry class with me during their 10th-grade year. All of the participants had graduated from La Lucha at the time of the
study and eight of the nine student participants were enrolled in selective 4-year colleges or universities when they
were interviewed. Cristina was enrolled at a local community college and later transferred to a large state university.
Student participants submitted work artifacts from the class, with four students (Cristina, Francisco, Odette, Raquel)
submitting complete collections of course artifacts.
The composition of the pool of participants presents some strengths and limitations with respect to this study.
The composition of the participant pool in terms of race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and gender mirrored the
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1040
MORALES-DOYLE
composition of the class and the school. But this does not suggest that the pool of participants is representative of
these larger groups. All nine of the student participants were enrolled in college at the time of the study. I do not have
speciﬁc data about college enrollment for the other 20 students who took the class but did not participate in the study.
I know from informal contact that most, but not all, of them enrolled in college after graduating from La Lucha. The
lack of participants who did not attend college excludes one important set of perspectives from this study. In a study
that is concerned with access to higher education as one of the goals of equitable science teaching, this limitation is
counterbalanced by the fact that the participants were able to compare their experiences in the case study class with
their experiences in college classes. Similarly, there is an overrepresentation of science majors among participants with
two chemistry majors, one physics major, one biology major, and one student who has her sights set on medical school.
The overrepresentation of science majors and college students among participants suggest that these nine participants
may have been among the most academically successful in the class. It is difﬁcult to make a fair comparison between
these students and the 20 students who did not participate, but it is safe to say that the nine participants were all
successful in the class. While no students failed the case study class, there were others who were less successful.
The three stakeholders who participated include two community members and one parent. Ms. Juarez and Ms.
Avila are both Latina women who participated in the hunger strike that founded the school. They are long-time West
Ridgevale residents who are college-educated and work as educators. Ms. Epps is an African American woman and
Jade's mother. Ms. Epps has lived in East Ridgevale for most of her life. She is a military veteran who currently works as
an electrician. All three of these stakeholders were recruited to participate because of their involvement in the school
during the year of the case study class. Speciﬁcally, all three were involved in a community struggle over the ﬁring of the
principal that year. Ms. Avila attended a community event related to the class and Ms. Epps was familiar with the class
through her participation on the Local School Council and relationship with her daughter. Teaching artifacts included
extensive planning documents, curricular materials, and journal entries.
2.3
Data analysis
To organize the data, I began with a content analysis of student interview transcripts to identify the curricular units
that were most salient for students as they reﬂected on the class. This initial content analysis narrowed my focus to
four curricular units. The second phase was a time-series analysis of my archival records to reconstruct the origins and
planning process for each of the curricular units that emerged as salient from the initial content analysis. The third
phase was to code all 12 student and stakeholder interview transcripts using a priori codes that were developed from
theoretical propositions of both critical pedagogy and culturally relevant pedagogy. For example, the code “SSI as gen-
erative themes” was developed from propositions in Dos Santos (2009) and was used to code interview data where
students or stakeholders spoke of SSI in the curriculum as central community concerns. The concept of students as
transformative intellectuals from Morrell (2008) and Romero (2014) was also used to develop codes like, “students
intervene in their lives and communities,” and “students as producers of knowledge and culture.” The prominence of
“academic achievement” in the work Ladson-Billings (1995) and science educators who draw on critical and cultur-
ally relevant pedagogies (Dimick, 2012) was also used to create codes like, “critique of traditional notions of academic
achievement” and to code passages where students and stakeholders spoke of academic achievement in more tradi-
tional ways by emphasizing grades and test scores. In the tradition of the extended case method, this phase of analysis
also intentionally sought disconﬁrming evidence for my theoretical propositions.
After coding interview transcripts, student work artifacts were selected based on the number of students who sub-
mitted each artifact and how well the goals of each assignment aligned with the themes of the larger unit. These arti-
facts were analyzed using codes from the interview transcript analysis and relevant learning standards from the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013) and the College Board. The ﬁnal phase of data analysis con-
sisted of pattern matching and triangulating within and across the three data subsets. One of the curricular units, the
“soil project,” is emphasized in this article. The soil project was an attempt to understand the impact of two recently
closed coal power plants on Ridgevale soil contamination as an issue of environmental justice. The soil project is the
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1041
focus of this study because it serves as an exemplar of justice-centered science pedagogy. While this single unit is used
to illustrate the themes discussed here, the ﬁndings emerged from analysis of four units.
2.4
Teacher–researcher experience(s) and political clarity
My reasons for teaching at La Lucha High School are connected with my experiences and the ways I understand social
change to occur. I taught at La Lucha for 7 years, living in East Ridgevale for the ﬁrst 3 years and in a nearby community
that is similar to West Ridgevale thereafter. Even as the story of the school's founding resonates with my beliefs and
some of my experiences, it is important for me to acknowledge that I came to the school as a privileged outsider and
an employee of a school system that has a long track record of neglect and miseducation in Ridgevale and other similar
neighborhoods. In addition to my privilege based on race, class, gender, sexuality, and education, I also must acknowl-
edge the power and privilege that comes with being a teacher. Darder (2002) notes that although teachers often feel
powerless, we actually have signiﬁcant power to make decisions that have real implications for our students’ lives. In an
effort to contextualize the ﬁndings that follow, here I share personal experiences and reﬂections that provide relevant
context.
When I was in second Grade, the neighborhood school I attended was physically falling apart and threatened with
closure. Martin Luther King Jr. Elementary School was home to the only multicultural education program in that district
at the time and its closure was unacceptable to parents. As a 7-year-old child, I canvassed the neighborhood with my
parents circulating petitions to save our school. The success of this campaign taught me about the power of community
organizing, but also about the lengths to which marginalized communities must go to control the education of their
own children. When I heard the story of La Lucha, it resonated with these experiences. I was honored to be a founding
member of the science department.
Another formative and relevant experience came when I was a high school chemistry student and was another sit-
uation where my parents and neighbors organized against injustice. This time the campaign was to force the closure of
two medical waste incinerators located in the largely African American neighborhood where I grew up. As a teenager, I
was a reluctant and marginal participant in this struggle. But this experience eventually led me to study environmental
racism and I came to understand the evidence and frameworks that have established the centrality of race and racism
in the unequal distribution of toxic pollution and its impact (Bullard, Mohai, Saha, & Wright, 2008). This understand-
ing of environmental racism informed curriculum I developed as a novice teacher around the issue of childhood lead
poisoning. Unfortunately, my own lack of teaching experience resulted in this previous curriculum being much less suc-
cessful than the project analyzed here. Upon sharing this curriculum in several settings, I learned of an organization in
the West Ridgevale community called Communities Organized Versus Environmental Racism (COVER).
When I was hired at La Lucha, I contacted COVER to learn from them about the issues around that they were orga-
nizing. In our ﬁrst meeting, COVER introduced me to the city's two coal power plants, located in West Ridgevale and
an adjacent Mexican community. These two coal power plants were identiﬁed among the worst perpetrators of envi-
ronmental racism in the country for their virtual lack of pollution controls and location within densely populated com-
munities of color (Patterson et al., 2012). My notes from that meeting indicate that closing these plants was at the top
of COVER's list of priorities. A protracted grassroots struggle led by COVER and a similar organization in the adjacent
community ﬁnally won the closure of both plants just as the case study class began.
The analysis of meeting notes, journal entries, and curriculum maps makes it clear that my extended involvement
with various formations of politically active teachers and subsequently with COVER was crucial to developing my own
political clarity and professional networks in ways that eventually made the soil project possible. I include these experi-
ences to acknowledge the role of my own worldview in identifying coal power plant pollution and environmental racism
as potential SJSI at La Lucha. Political clarity was necessary in order for me to hear the community voices that identiﬁed
this SSI as a generative theme.
As I accumulated experience at La Lucha, my colleagues and I continued to develop various curricular units con-
nected with the coal power plants and other generative themes. During a decade of experience as a full time high school
science teacher, I reﬁned my practice. With the support of mentors and collaboration with colleagues, I worked to hone
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1042
MORALES-DOYLE
TABLE 2
The soil project as an example of justice-centered science pedagogy
Timeline
SJSI
Antiracist Science
Education
Equitable Academic
Expectations
Youth as
Transformative
Intellectuals
Summer
Predict and explain
chemical reactions
Fall
Investigate coal
power plant
pollution
Understand
environmental
racism locally
and as a larger
phenomenon
Understand spectroscopy
and analyze data
Read peer-reviewed
articles
Spring
Write original lab reports
Participate in an
authentic scientiﬁc
investigation in a
community context
Present at family
science night
Relevant data sources
Notes from
community
meetings (prior
to the class)
Teacher plans and
reﬂections
(prior to and
during the class)
Community
stakeholder
interviews
(after the class)
Student
interviews
(after the class)
Quiz problem
about lead soil
contamination
in the city (Fall)
Student lab
reports (Fall)
Homework
problem about
childhood lead
poisoning
(Spring)
Homework
problem about
uranium mining
on Navajo
reservation
(Spring)
Student-created presentation at family science
night (Spring)
Sign-in sheet from family science night (Spring)
Student interviews (after the class)
Community stakeholder interviews (after the class)
practices, classroom structures, and routines that made the soil project and other socially transformative science cur-
riculum effective (Morales-Doyle, 2015). Besides the development of my own teaching practice, a strong partnership
with university scientists was facilitated by COVER organizers. This partnership aided the successful completion of the
soil project 9 years after my initial less successful attempt to implement similar curriculum at a previous school.
3
THE SOIL PROJECT
In the soil project, students participated in a larger investigation of the lasting impact of the recently closed coal power
plants on the community's physical environment by measuring the concentrations of lead and mercury in neighbor-
hood soil samples. This project stretched across much of the school year as we worked on it intermittently between
other units. Table 2 summarizes the components of the soil project chronologically and also includes relevant data
sources, both organized in terms of the components of justice-centered science pedagogy outlined above. In the sum-
mer session, we studied the various chemical reactions associated with coal mining and coal combustion, including
many secondary processes like acid-mine runoff and the reaction of NOx and SO2 by-products in the atmosphere. In
the fall, our class was invited by COVER organizers to participate in a larger study led by Dr. Héctor Reyes, a chemi-
cal engineer and community college professor. Dr. Reyes used a sabbatical to conduct a study that involved collecting
90 soil samples from randomly generated sites within a 5-mile radius of each of the two coal power plants. Ten stu-
dents from the case study class volunteered to collect 33 of the 180 total samples outside of class time. The whole
class took a ﬁeld trip to a research university in a nearby suburb where students used an undergraduate instructional
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1043
laboratory and procedure (Baker, Geiger, Hatch, Todebush, 2012) to perform a nitric acid digestion of the soil samples
they had collected. Students submitted the samples they worked up to university researchers led by Dr. Shelby Hatch,
who used an Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometer (ICP-AES) to analyze them. Students used
spreadsheet software to analyze the data sent by university researchers and compare the concentrations of lead and
mercury in the soil samples with state regulations. In class, students read, discussed, and annotated a peer reviewed
journal article on heavy metal soil contamination and remediation (Wuana & Okieimen, 2011). Students wrote individ-
ual lab reports using this article and state environmental guidelines as a framework to understand the results of the
study they conducted.
Together with COVER and ofﬁcials from the US EPA, students helped to organize a family science night on a Thurs-
day evening in the school cafeteria in March. The sign-in sheet from that evening includes 126 parents, teachers,
students, and other community members. For most of the evening, the cafeteria (which accommodates about 350
students) was slightly less than half full. The ﬁrst part of the event was organized like a science fair where students
from several science classes at La Lucha presented projects from their classes on trifold boards and EPA ofﬁcials and
COVER organizers presented about other projects and campaigns. After the fair-style portion of the event, the audi-
ence sat in rows as EPA ofﬁcials formally presented the results from the various studies they were conducting in the
neighborhood. Eight students from the case study class (including participants Cristina, Curtis, Odette, Marisol, and
Gabriel) contributed their own 17-minute presentation of the results of the soil study. They were followed by Reyes,
who expanded on their presentation by communicating the results of his larger study. Family science night garnered
some local media attention as two outlets, including a daily Spanish-language newspaper, covered the event.
Reyes’ (2013) larger study found alarmingly high levels of heavy metals outside of Ridgevale, further downwind
from the power plants. The larger study also documented a statistically signiﬁcant increase in lead concentrations
when comparing concentrations upwind from the plant in Ridgevale with concentrations between the two plants or
downwind from both. Reyes had not completed his analysis at the time students wrote their reports, which focused
only on the soil samples their small group or our class collected. Reyes presented his results as relatively inconclusive,
but noted that they raised enough concern about the impact of the power plants to warrant further study. Of course,
this approach represented one way of considering the residual impact of decades of coal power plant pollution and the
methods were limited by various constraints.
4
FINDINGS
Three major ﬁndings are presented here within the context of the soil project. These ﬁndings emerged from an analy-
sis of the case study class as a whole, but the soil project provides an exemplar of justice-centered science pedagogy,
which facilitates their presentation. These ﬁndings are linked with the components of justice-centered science peda-
gogy outlined in the framework and Table 2 above. They also allowed for a theoretical reconstruction of the relation-
ships between these components, as presented in the Discussion section. In this section, I begin with an examination of
evidence about the relevance of environmental racism and coal power plant pollution in West Ridgevale. Then, I ana-
lyze student work for evidence of academic achievement. Finally, I consider the ways in which students transcended
standard notions of academic achievement to position themselves as transformative intellectuals.
4.1
Environmental racism as SJSI
Within the context of the Ridgevale community, coal power plant pollution was a local place-based SSI. But was it also
a generative theme? A generative theme “must be precisely at the level of the people's aspirations and dreams, their
understanding of reality, and their forms of action and struggle” (Freire & Faundez, 1992, p. 27 as cited in Gutstein,
2012, p. 26). An SJSI grapples with issues of social justice as it intersects with scientiﬁc phenomena and resonates with
the hearts and minds of the students. To identify coal power plant pollution as an SJSI requires consideration of the
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1044
MORALES-DOYLE
way students and community members view this issue. This implies extending beyond the case study class to analyze
the community context over time.
The way students and community members spoke about the coal power plant indicate that it was a relevant issue
in the community. Raquel said in an interview that the soil project was the unit during which she learned the most.
She elaborated on the importance of the soil project with a story about how she and her cousins would include the
coal power plant in their childhood games by pretending it was a giant robot. They would compete to see who could
run the furthest distance between consecutive ﬂashes of the aircraft warning lights on top of the smokestacks to avoid
capture by the evil robot. Rather than becoming part of childhood games, the coal plant often ruined playtime for Curtis
and his siblings. Curtis’ mother would not allow them to play outside when the power plant was emitting particularly
large plumes of smoke. Curtis was one of 10 students who volunteered to do extra work on the soil project outside of
school. He attributed his involvement to a desire to learn whether his mother's concerns were supported by scientiﬁc
evidence. Gabriel traced his curiosity about the plant to noticing it while accompanying his parents on errands as a child.
He participated in the soil project after school because he wondered whether the coal power plant was to blame for his
asthma. Jade, who grew up in the predominately African American neighborhood of East Ridgevale, also volunteered
her time outside of class to work on the soil project. She remembered worrying about the plant on her way to school and
mentionedthatstudyingitinenvironmentalscienceclasswasimpactful.Bothcommunitymemberswhoparticipatedin
the study also identiﬁed the impact of pollution as a concern in the neighborhood. Ms. Juarez spoke passionately about
environmental issues in the community that have climbed her list of priorities with the closure of the power plants.
Ms. Avila said that she was “fascinated” by the impact of pollution on the community and stressed the importance of
holding local industries accountable for their emissions.
The students’ memories and community members’ assertions underscore the relevance of the coal power plant in
students’ lives and in Ridgevale to make a strong case that it was indeed a generative theme and SJSI. But there was also
disconﬁrming evidence that suggested that this was not the case for all students or community members. For example,
in my notes from the ﬁrst meeting with students who volunteered to collect soil samples outside of school, I noted
that several students ﬁrst learned about the plant in environmental science class at La Lucha. In an interview, Cristina
conﬁrmed that this was the case for her. Also, most of the participants, including Ms. Juarez and Ms. Avila, identiﬁed
the lack of economic opportunities, not pollution in general or the coal power plant in particular, as the central concern
in Ridgevale.
This raises an important tension for science educators when it comes to identifying SJSI. Communities are complex
places where residents often have very different views. While there was widespread agreement among participants
about the importance of economic opportunity, all students were not necessarily aware of or concerned about the coal
power plant when they came to La Lucha. Still, some segment of the community, including residents who volunteer or
work for COVER, had identiﬁed the closure of the coal power plant as a central concern and some of the students’ child-
hood memories support that notion. Odette captured the complexity of the ways that SJSI may play out in communities
that are economically dispossessed in our interview when she described her commitment to working for environmental
justice and the relative privilege she feels as she studies to become a college-educated chemist:
I mean I know a lot of families have trouble like paying the rent and stuff like that. But I really would like to
focus on their environment because I feel like people do have rent paying issues and a bunch of other things that
are piling up in their lives, and they don't have time to focus on their health and a lot of people don't focus on
their health. And so, it would be nice to at least provide the community with a clean environment where they are
healthy and they don't necessarily have to put their health at the top of the list because they don't have time to.
(Odette, Interview, 18 months after class)
In this quote, Odette captures the sad irony of environmental racism: those communities who can least afford to
spend scarce time and resources on issues of environmental health are the same communities most afﬂicted with
various forms of pollution. So, while the coal power plant or environmental racism may not have been at the top of
the community's list of concerns, these issues are still important. This suggests that science educators must continue
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1045
TABLE 3
Example homework and quiz problems related to heavy metal contamination
Quiz Problem (September 4)
Homework Problem (March 19)
Homework Problem (March 26)
(i) Write a balanced
equation for the
following reaction: Lead
(II) acetate solution
reacts with aqueous
sodium carbonate.
(ii) In our city's soil, lead is
usually converted into
lead carbonates or lead
sulfates. Explain why
lead contamination stays
in the same place in the
soil for decades.
Applying Le Châtelier's principle to a real
problem: When the concentration of Pb2+
ions in a child's blood reaches a
concentration of 10 𝜇g/dL, the child is
considered by the Centers for Disease
Control to be ofﬁcially lead poisoned. One
of the treatments for lead poisoning is
called chelation therapy. In this therapy, a
chemical called EDTA is used to remove
lead ions from the blood by forming
water-soluble complex ions. While
chelation therapy is very effective at
removing lead from the blood, it cannot
remove lead that has deposited in a child's
bones. The lead in a child's bones is mostly
in the form of PbCO3(s). If we think of
blood as an aqueous solution, lead can
diffuse from the blood into the bones or
from bones into the blood by the following
process:
PbCO3(s) ⇌ Pb2+(aq) + CO3
2−(aq)
While chelation therapy decreases the
concentration of lead in the blood, it
usually rises again as soon as therapy
ends. Use Le Châtelier's principle and the
reaction above to explain this. In your
answer, use the terms: equilibrium,
reactants, products, concentration, and
chelation therapy.
Earlier in the year, we learned about a group
called the Eastern Navajo Dine Against
Uranium Mining (ENDAUM) that
successfully prevented in situ leech mining
on their reservation in New Mexico. In the
documentary Homeland that showed their
struggle, one of ENDAUM's founders and
leaders named Mitchell Capitan talked
about how in experiments he did in his job as
a lab technician, all of the uranium could
never be extracted from the water in this
process.
(b) In this process, uranium is often
precipitated out of ground water as
Na2U2O7. Write the dissociation equation
for this compound as it dissolves in water.
(c) The Ksp for this compound is 8.13 × 10–29.
Calculate the maximum concentration of
diuranate ions (U2O7
2–) at equilibrium.
(d) The EPA limit for uranium is 30 𝜇g/L of
drinking water. Complete the calculations
necessary to determine if the saturated
solution in the previous part of this
problem will exceed these limits.
(e) People often add salt, NaCl, to their
cooking water. Use LeChâtelier's principle
to explain what this would do to the
solubility of Na2U2O7 in water. Explain
whether this would make the water more
or less dangerous in terms of uranium
content.
(f) Calculate the mass of solid that would
form if 0.10 moles of NaCl were added to
1 L of the saturated solution from part (b).
Assume no volume change.
The parts of the March 26 homework problem begin with part (b) due to a typo in the assignment. There was no part (a).
to grapple with what constitutes an SJSI and how to identify scientiﬁc issues that intersect with the genuine concerns
of communities.
4.2
Equitable academic expectations and achievement
The analysis of student artifacts provides evidence that the case study class supported students’ academic achieve-
ment within the context of the soil project and beyond. The complete course binders submitted by four students con-
tain dozens of examples of students meeting various NGSS and College Board expectations. Table 3 includes three
example quiz and homework problems that illustrate how students moved toward and then beyond a particular NGSS
performance expectation to solve problems typical of the AP chemistry exam and college general chemistry courses.
These three problems come from various points across the school year and are contextualized by the theme of the
soil project: environmental racism and heavy-metal contamination in economically dispossessed communities of color.
These problems also demonstrate a progression of complexity in terms of chemistry and with respect to the SJSI.
The ﬁrst problem (dated September 4) comes from the ﬁrst of six quizzes that were given monthly and modeled
after a free response question format that appeared on each year's AP chemistry exam until 2013 (College Board,
2012). This particular problem deals with the persistence of lead contamination in urban soil as it relates to the insol-
ubility of the compounds that lead forms in the environment. In this problem, solubility is conceived in a simple binary
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1046
MORALES-DOYLE
TABLE 4
Key content expectations related to chemical equilibrium
NGSS Performance Expectations (NGSS Lead States, 2013)
NGSS.HS-PS1-6: Reﬁne the design of a chemical system by specifying a change in conditions that would produce
increased amounts of products at equilibrium. [Clariﬁcation Statement: Emphasis is on the application of Le
Châtelier's principle and on reﬁning designs of chemical reaction systems, including descriptions of the connection
between changes made at the macroscopic level and what happens at the molecular level. Examples of designs could
include different ways to increase product formation including adding reactants or removing products.] [Assessment
Boundary: Assessment is limited to specifying the change in only one variable at a time. Assessment does not include
calculating equilibrium constants and concentrations.]
AP Chemistry Course Description Topics (College Board, 2012)
“Concept of dynamic equilibrium, physical and chemical; Le Châtelier's principle; equilibrium constants…Quantitative
treatment [of]…Solubility product constants and their application to precipitation and the dissolution of slightly
soluble compounds [and] common ion effect” (p. 7).
“Knowledge of speciﬁc facts of chemistry is essential for an understanding of principles and concepts. These
descriptive facts, including the chemistry involved in environmental and societal issues, should not be isolated from
the principles being studied but should be taught throughout the course to illustrate and illuminate the principles.
The following areas should be covered: Chemical reactivity and products of chemical reactions …” (p. 8).
where compounds are either soluble or not and the framing of the SJSI is also straightforward as it focuses only on
the persistence of lead compounds in the surface of the city's soil. The second problem (dated March 19) comes from
a weekly homework assignment during the equilibrium unit. It asks about the same compound, but this time in the
context of childhood lead poisoning, which remains a serious public health concern in urban communities of color that
have been damaged by hypersegregation caused by discriminatory housing practices and postindustrial neglect. This
problem asks students to move beyond an understanding of lead (II) carbonate as simply “soluble” or “insoluble” by ask-
ing them to grapple with dynamic equilibrium. The framing of the SJSI also increases in complexity compared with the
ﬁrst problem as it deals with the health implications of lead contamination. The third and ﬁnal problem (dated March
26) comes from the subsequent weekly homework assignment and deals with uranium contamination of ground water
by in situ leach mining on a Navajo reservation in New Mexico. This problem is linked with the previous two in that it
deals with heavy metal contamination in a community of color that has been dispossessed and oppressed. The problem
references a documentary ﬁlm about this issue that we watched in class (Grossman, 2005). By focusing on a similar
SJSI, but with a different metal and in a different context, this problem asks students to consider this issue as it exists
beyond the communities where they live. It also extends the concept of slightly soluble compounds by asking students
to consider small amounts of dissolved solids conceptually and quantitatively.
While learning standards can be problematic, they also represent the sanctioned forms of knowledge that are val-
ued by educational institutions that have substantial impact on young people's lives. For this reason, my analysis con-
sidered the extent to which student work provides evidence of meeting an NGSS performance expectation and proﬁ-
ciency with associated College Board topics for AP chemistry in Table 4. Student responses to these three problems are
depicted in Table 5, with some of my markings and responses only for part (e) for the third problem. Across these exam-
ples of student responses, three of four students for whom data are available (Cristina, Odette, and Raquel) demon-
strated an ability to apply Le Châtelier's principle, a point of emphasis in both the NGSS performance expectations
(NGSS Lead States, 2013) and AP chemistry course description (College Board, 2012). For example, in the second prob-
lem, Raquel showed her understanding of dynamic equilibrium by applying this canonical concept to a novel situation.
She concisely explained why a poisoned child's blood lead level increases immediately following treatment:
LeChâtelier's principle applies to the case of chelation therapy because in the process you add EDTA which is
removing products, therefore the reaction would shift to the products side. This means that more of the solid lead
from the bones, which is a reactant, dissolves to produce more products and get back to equilibrium. (Raquel,
Homework, March 19)
In this response, Raquel demonstrates the science and engineering practice of constructing an explanation to
address the cross-cutting concept of stability and change and the disciplinary core idea of forward and reverse
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1047
TABLE 5
Example student work artifacts from homework and quiz problems on heavy metal contamination
StudentQuiz Problem on September 4
Homework Problem on March 19
Homework Problem on March 26 (Part e)
Cristina
Curtis
Data not available
Data not available
Francisco
Odette
Raquel
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1048
MORALES-DOYLE
TABLE 6
Summary of student responses to uranium problem
Student
(b) Wrote
Dissociation
Equation
(c) Calculated
[U2O7
2–] at
Equilibrium
(d) Compared with
EPA Limits
(e) Explained
Common Ion Effect
(f) Calculated Mass
of Solid Formed
Cristina
✓
✓
✓
✓
Francisco
✓
✓
✓
Odette
✓
✓
✓
✓
Raquel
✓
✓
✓
chemical reactions in equilibrium. While the problem did not give her an opportunity to design a solution, she oth-
erwise met performance expectation HS-PS1-6 (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Odette showed similar proﬁciency with this
problem. Odette and Cristina's performance on the uranium problem provide similar evidence.
Students also demonstrated, to varying levels of success, the ability to predict the products of a chemical reaction
and express that reaction in a balanced equation. Cristina, Curtis, and Odette executed this skill almost ﬂawlessly on
the ﬁrst problem, with the exception of Cristina omitting a charge on the carbonate ion. In the third problem on ura-
nium mining, students extended beyond the assessment boundary articulated for the NGSS performance expectation
to deal with chemical equilibrium quantitatively. This problem challenges the notion that dealing with issues of social
justice somehow comprises academic rigor in science curriculum. All four students were able to successfully answer
the ﬁrst three parts of the problem (b, c, d) with the level of supporting calculations, units, and attention to signiﬁcant
ﬁgures required by the AP chemistry exam. This problem speciﬁcally addresses the AP chemistry course description's
inclusion of “solubility product constants and their application to precipitation and the dissolution of slightly soluble
compounds” (College Board, 2012, p. 7). In this way, student work artifacts provide evidence of meeting College Board
expectations for AP chemistry. In other words, as 11th and 12th Graders in a neighborhood urban public school, stu-
dents met expectations associated with a typical second semester college general chemistry course. A summary of stu-
dent results is included in Table 6 along with Odette's response as an example in Figure 1. Some disconﬁrming evidence
is provided by the fact that none of these four students successfully answered part (f). This is a challenging problem
even in the context of a college chemistry class because it requires a sophisticated application of algebra to a chemi-
cal system and an ability to manipulate extremely small numbers. Still, Francisco, Odette, and Raquel correctly set up
a table to solve part (f). Odette came within an order of magnitude of the correct answer, but made a mistake in her
interpretation of the ﬁnal row of the table as it translated into the equilibrium expression. Francisco correctly trans-
lated the results from the table into an algebraic expression, but he used the value for the undisturbed equilibrium
concentration of diuranate ions where he should have used the value for the solubility product (Ksp). Francisco also did
not follow through with a ﬁnal subtraction or assumption that would have been required to arrive at an answer. Raquel
did not attempt the ﬁnal algebra and Cristina did not attempt the ﬁnal part of the problem at all. Even given these dif-
ﬁculties with the ﬁnal part of this problem, this student work provides evidence of substantial academic achievement
contextualized by the SJSI of environmental racism.
4.3
Youth as transformative intellectuals: Complexity, commitment, and credibility
The previous section provides evidence of high school students having success with concepts and skills that are
typically taught in undergraduate chemistry courses. But science education as a catalyst for social change requires
more than academic achievement among students from schools or demographic groups who have traditionally been
marginalized or denied opportunities in science. Broadened participation in problematic academic or scientiﬁc insti-
tutions does not address the root causes of oppression or exploitation, especially if this participation is contingent
upon assimilation into dominant cultural traditions (Bang and Vossoughi, 2016). Often times, academic achievement is
positioned as being at odds with, or at best in competition with, students’ commitments to their communities or cul-
tures of origin. Academic achievement is similarly assumed to be at odds with curriculum that focuses on issues of
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1049
FIGURE 1
Odette's full response to the uranium problem as an exemplar
social justice. Transformative intellectuals transcend these tensions as they leverage their learning in service of their
communities and struggles for social justice.
The triangulation of data from interviews, student lab reports from the soil project, and family science night shows
studentspositioning themselvesastransformative intellectualswhose academic achievementwasinterwovenwiththe
development of critical consciousness and the cultivation of a commitment to their communities of origin in three ways.
First, the messiness and uncertainty of engaging with authentic data in the soil project juxtaposed with the nuances
of how environmental racism was manifested in Ridgevale prompted students to think in critical and complex ways
about the relationships between scientiﬁc evidence and community self-determination. While this represents a chal-
lenge when engaging in justice-centered science pedagogy, it also serves as evidence of students’ developing critical
consciousness and willingness to engage with epistemic heterogeneity. Second, having the opportunity to present the
ﬁndings of the soil project to their community reinforced students’ commitment to be engaged, culturally competent
members of that community. Finally, students’ academic achievement in chemistry combined with their positional-
ity as youth from Ridgevale to provide them with credibility that allowed them to take on the role of transformative
intellectuals. Thus, in a justice-centered approach, these pedagogical goals were mutually supportive, rather than com-
peting for class time or curricular space.
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1050
MORALES-DOYLE
4.3.1
Complexity in science and social justice
Engaging with curriculum organized around SJSI supported students to develop critical consciousness that came
through in their work and interviews. For example, Francisco reﬂected on how his understandings from the soil project
informed a project he completed the following year:
I did my senior capstone project on environmental racism because I started realizing that if you really look at
where these power plants are located, it's always in communities where it's mainly inhabited by minorities or
low income families … it's unfair. My senior capstone project was basically to make more people aware of what's
going on. (Francisco, Interview, 16 months after class)
HereFranciscodescribeshisacademicworkinthesoilprojectascontributingtohisunderstandingofenvironmental
racism, which in turn motivated him to engage in further academic work that was also intertwined with the action of
“raising awareness.” This quote represents the development of critical consciousness because Francisco explains how
his perspective was pushed beyond dominant narratives to understand the ways racism and economic forces unfairly
inﬂuence environmental conditions.
Despite focusing his senior capstone project on environmental racism, Francisco did not discuss the concept explic-
itly in his soil project lab report, but ﬁve of the nine participants did. Their discussions ranged in tone from Cristina who
described the company who owned the plants as having “invaded two predominantly Latino communities” to Odette
who wrote, “The location of the power plants suggests environmental racism.” Infusing a discussion of environmental
racism into a scientiﬁc lab report that was completed and evaluated according to an undergraduate chemistry rubric
provides another example of the ways the soil project curriculum wove together academic achievement and critical
consciousness.
The soil project provided an opportunity for students to think in complex ways about science and social justice.
Still, it would have beneﬁtted from greater attention to the principles of YPAR and epistemic heterogeneity to support
students as they grappled with issues of inconclusive evidence and the limitations of scientiﬁc knowledge in their com-
munity context. Only one of the soil samples collected by students showed levels of lead that violated state thresholds
for remediation and none that violated the thresholds for mercury. While Reyes’ larger study found more alarming
results downwind from Ridgevale, students struggled with the tension between the claims that their evidence sup-
ported and their conviction that the power plant was an unwelcome polluter that damaged the local environment.
Odette expressed frustration with this tension in the interview:
But then as the science gets more deﬁned, it's kind of like it is more difﬁcult to make a claim and blame somebody
for doing something wrong…Like with the lab report with the coal power plant, there's no deﬁnitive conclusion
that the coal power plants did cause an increase in asthma attacks…you can't blame the people who owned the
plant for that, so it does get more difﬁcult. I found that hard to accept. (Odette, Interview, 18 months after class)
Odette expresses frustration with the complexity and limitations of the ﬁndings as they relate to the community's
ability to advocate for environmental health and justice. These limitations include the focus on heavy metals rather
than the air pollutants associated with asthma.
Students dealt with this tension in several ways in their lab reports, including offering suggestions for improved
scientiﬁc approaches and for alternate interpretations of their ﬁndings. In the ﬁndings section of his lab report, Jackson
noted, “The power plants did not cause high levels of lead and mercury in Ridgevale soil. However, this does not mean
that the power plants did not pollute communities.” Here Jackson acknowledges that the soil project attempted to
measure the impact of the coal power plants in one very limited way. Indeed, given the airborne and more temporary
nature of most pollutants emitted by the plants (like sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, particulate matter, and carbon
dioxide), the real damage of the plants may be better assessed by different means. In the conclusion of her report,
Marisol suggested several possible follow-up studies that could clarify the results, including an isotope ﬁngerprinting
study that Reyes originally proposed, increased use of statistical methods, and, “possibly looking at the health effects of
the power plant through a different lens, a biological lens.” These reports show how the soil project prompted students
to think in complex ways about the epistemology of science and the design of environmental studies.
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1051
In their reports, Cristina and Odette problematized typical assumptions about the relationship between scientiﬁc
evidence and decision making. For example, Cristina wrote in her lab report:
The safety limit should not determine whether or not we should move forward and clean the soil. Ridgevale has
the right to be informed about what was found in their neighborhood soil. Lead and mercury are both very harm-
ful if they are directly ingested. (Cristina, Lab Report, November 2)
Cristina asserts in this statement that, with or without levels of heavy metals that exceed state regulations,
Ridgevale residents should be in control of the land in their community, which requires being knowledgeable about
contaminants. Given that federal agencies have declared “no amount of lead is safe,” (NIEHS, 2016), Cristina's chal-
lenge to the state regulations is reasonable. Odette's lab report provides another argument for why local residents
should have more say in determining safe levels of toxic metals in their soil:
Though the [power] plants are located in a city, problems in agriculture can occur because many people in
Ridgevale plant fruits and vegetables in their backyards. Those people will then be consuming fruits and veg-
etables that may contain lead and mercury. (Odette, Lab Report, October 26)
Odette's report questions whether typical residential soil standards are the appropriate measure for Ridgevale soil,
given the agricultural activity not typically associated with urban neighborhoods. While students were assigned to
compare the measured levels of lead and mercury with state guidelines, these excerpts from Odette's and Cristina's
lab reports provide examples of students extending beyond a simple numerical comparison to engage in more nuanced
thinking about SJSI. Odette's point about backyard gardens also underscores the ways that local knowledge informs
studies of environmental health in important ways (Corburn, 2005). This idea also emerged in Cristina's interview as
she spoke about her work with COVER after she graduated from La Lucha, “When we would do the community dinners,
I saw a lot of people …who don't have a background in science, who were teaching me about science—stuff that I didn't
know because they've been farming forever.” Here Cristina challenges the notion that scientiﬁc learning happens only
in formal settings and expresses an admiration for the knowledge about plants her neighbors built through experience.
In the conclusion of her lab report, Raquel brought some of these ideas together as she suggested a way that this
local knowledge could be used to address the problem of heavy metal contamination. Drawing on the soil chemistry
article that we read in class and content she learned in her environmental science class, Raquel proposed that the
Ridgevale soil be decontaminated through phytoremediation by growing sunﬂowers and other plants that would be
effective at removing lead and mercury. Taken together, these students’ ideas allow us to see how youth who value
both scientiﬁc and local ways of knowing can begin to address complex SJSI in practical and transformative ways.
Reﬂecting onthe soil projectprompted studentstoreconsider relationshipsbetweenknowledge and action. Gabriel
referred to students’ presentation of the soil project results as “a kind of protest, but more academic,” although Odette
repeatedly expressed frustration with the relationship between science and activism:
When people were protesting the coal power plant, the rest of the community and people driving by saw the
activism. And science wasn't – I mean, it was obvious, like let's shut this down because it's bad for our health
and that's science, but it wasn't really the science that people noticed, it was the activism. (Odette, Interview, 18
months after class)
Although Gabriel considered the students’ practice of science to be “a kind of protest,” Odette's quote separated the
effectiveness of community activism from the scientiﬁc reasoning that may (or may not) support their position. Justice-
centered science pedagogy does not purport to know or espouse a simple or static relationship between science and
struggles for social justice. Rather, it seeks to engage students in developing their scientiﬁc understandings and critical
consciousness so that they can make sense of the various ways this relationship might manifest in their lives and com-
munities. By engaging in this complexity within the context of SJSI, students in the case study class took on the role of
transformative intellectuals.
These examples of students’ complex thinking also highlight ways in which the soil project curriculum could be
improved using principles of YPAR and epistemic heterogeneity. The soil project shares many of the features of YPAR
in that young people investigated a real problem in their community and then chose to take some action, upon which
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1052
MORALES-DOYLE
they later reﬂected. However, youth were not involved in the initial formulation of the question and the design of the
study. The examples from their work demonstrate that they were capable of thinking about alternate approaches to
investigating the impact of the coal power plants. YPAR could have offered them an opportunity to do so.
Cristina and Odette's assertions about the importance of local knowledge and community self-determination high-
light an opportunity to foreground epistemic heterogeneity. This was not an explicit consideration in the soil project,
even though it was in other parts of the curriculum. Cristina and Odette problematized the relationship between sci-
entiﬁc evidence and community action. In raising the prevalence of grassroots urban farming in Ridgevale, they also
highlighted relevant knowledge held by community members. Providing more support and opportunities to consider
chemistry as only one among many ways of understanding the problem could have strengthened the soil project. This
approach could have encouraged students to build on each other's ideas and even implement some version of Raquel's
phytoremediation plan.
4.3.2
Commitment to community
The soil project, as curriculum organized around an SJSI, also cultivated students’ already existing commitments to
their communities and cultures of origin. Cristina repeatedly articulated connections between community relevance
and academic achievement. As she was reﬂecting on writing the soil project lab report in our interview, Cristina empha-
sized scientiﬁc knowledge production by and for the community:
We're not just reading a report by other people. We're doing our own report by ourselves as people who live in
the community and are exposed to the environmental issues here. And we're doing something – not necessarily
to ﬁx it, but to understand it, which makes a huge difference. And I really liked it because I was taking what I was
learning in class and applying it to my community. (Cristina, Interview, 16 months after class)
While she recognizes that simply understanding issues of toxic contamination in the Ridgevale community is not
a solution, Cristina expresses ownership and agency with respect to producing knowledge about the problem. As a
young person living in a community impacted by environmental racism, Cristina's comments provide a glimpse into
how justice-centered science pedagogy might act as a catalyst for social change by supporting students to take on the
role of transformative intellectuals.
Odette and Cristina explicitly discussed the ways that the soil project was an impetus for deeper engagement
with their community and with issues of environmental justice. After graduation, both Odette and Cristina worked
for COVER in some capacity and both chose to major in chemistry. Both young women attributed that choice to the
connections between community and chemistry they developed in the soil project. Both of these women described
their involvement in the soil project as interconnected with their involvement in other local causes, which deepened
over time. In this way, Cristina and Odette provide evidence of the ways that problem-posing education can simulta-
neously deepen intellectual understandings and commitment to important social justice issues in local communities
(Freire, 1970/2001; Romero, 2014). Cristina and Odette's deep levels of engagement in chemistry and local issues of
environmental justice are not representative of the class as a whole. In fact, Jackson provided some counterevidence
in a reﬂection where he wrote that he was not motivated by the context of the soil project. But we would not expect
uniform levels of (or reasons for) engagement in any science class. Cristina and Odette's stories are important because
they provide a way to understand how students positioned as transformative intellectuals can synergistically achieve
academically while deepening their commitment to their communities.
This understanding is bolstered by several students who emphasized that having the opportunity to share their
ﬁndings with their community at family science night was important for their own learning because of the academic
challenge of preparing a presentation about which they cared deeply. The students presented bilingually in English
and Spanish, which they noted in interviews as a considerable challenge. The following quote from Marisol's interview
captures an idea that was also communicated by other students about how there was more to it than just translating
their presentation to Spanish:
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1053
And so, I was just going back and forth not only in terms of [English and Spanish] but in terms of scientiﬁc lan-
guage and taking away all this jargon. And so, I realized the importance of being able to go back and forth. I also
realized the importance of having that connection with the community because I feel like when the people from
the EPA spoke, I feel like a lot of people tuned out. (Marisol, Interview, 16 months after class)
Marisol's comments here are important for two different reasons, the second of which is the focus of section 4.6.
First, Marisol twice mentions how she “realized the importance” of cultural competence (linguistically and in terms of
community membership) while presenting at family science night. Students were presenting bilingually, but were also
trying to communicate complex scientiﬁc ideas with audience members, many of whom did not have access to formal
science education. Marisol thus explains how her academic achievement and her commitment to her community and
culture were mutually supportive in the soil project.
4.3.3
The credibility of transformative intellectuals
Marisol's contrast between the receptions of the students’ presentation and that of the EPA ofﬁcials also speaks to
the credibility students earned as scientiﬁcally literate members of a marginalized community. Marisol emphasized
that she and her classmates were uniquely positioned to communicate the results of their study in a meaningful way
because of their “connection with the community,” which is the essence of an organic intellectual who works in soli-
darity with their social class. In justice-centered science pedagogy, this credibility is a key attribute of a transformative
intellectual. The credibility of transformative intellectuals combines the credibility of a knowledgeable expert with the
credibility that comes from being a trusted member of a marginalized community.
Marisol said that the science night presentation was the work from the course in which she takes the most pride
because of her ability to explain the soil project in terms the audience understood. She said that the most impactful
lesson she learned from the experience was the importance of “code switching” or moving between academic and ver-
nacular forms of communication. Marisol's comments underscore how content knowledge, community membership,
cultural competence, and bilingualism are important for establishing credibility when communicating relevant scien-
tiﬁc ﬁndings to a community that is marginalized by the dominant culture. The special credibility leveraged by students
at family science night was a theme in other participants’ reﬂections. Some EPA ofﬁcials and Dr. Reyes also presented
bilingually in English and Spanish, but still students and Ms. Avila agreed that students’ presentation had a different
impact because of their status as youth from the community. Reﬂecting on the science night presentation in our inter-
view, Cristina described the impact this way: “[Community members] weren't being told just by some PhD EPA ofﬁcials
or city ofﬁcials what's in their neighborhood, but they were being told by their own kids, their own young people from
the neighborhood, which is even more important or impactful.” Cristina's comments align with the principles of YPAR
(Cammarota & Fine, 2008) and with research that asserts that the people living with the impacts of environmental
racism have important contributions to make to the study and remediation of urban contamination (Balasz & Morello-
Frosch, 2013; Corburn, 2005). Cristina also pushes one step further by arguing that the development of experts from
within the community is a powerful way to understand and address these issues. Cristina stressed that her chemistry
major earned her increased credibility when discussing issues of pollution in the context of her job as an organizer
for COVER. By simultaneously embracing the credibility that comes with learning sanctioned forms of science knowl-
edge and the credibility that comes with membership in a marginalized community, Cristina has positioned herself as a
transformative intellectual.
Odette speculated that by embracing their role as transformative intellectuals, students may have increased their
community's sense of agency in science:
It was cool to have the science out for the people and I feel that it was even more important that it was…high
school students who live in the community doing the science …it makes the distance closer…So it's like people
have the realization that they can do science. They don't have to necessarily work for the government like the
EPA guys…in order to be able to do science. (Odette, Interview, 18 months after class)
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1054
MORALES-DOYLE
Ms. Avila, who was in the audience that night, also echoed Cristina and Odette's comments about the unique ability
of local youth to communicate with their parents and neighbors: “When it's the youth doing it, I think that's incredi-
bly powerful. They have this wonder about themselves…the excitement of being able to show something that is true,
important, and vital for people that live in communities like Ridgevale.” Ms. Avila's comment captures how science as
a catalyst for social change positions young people as producers of knowledge and culture who are capable of solving
the problems facing our communities and our world (Duncan-Andrade & Morrell, 2008; Morrell, 2008; Romero, 2014).
This further suggests that YPAR in a science context, or youth participatory science, may be a powerful tool for science
education and social change. Students’ reﬂections on the importance of their presentation at family science night cap-
ture the credibility that emerges from scientiﬁc knowledge combined with membership in a community impacted by
SJSI like environmental racism.
Still, the education of experts from within marginalized communities remains problematic. Curtis critiqued the fam-
ily science night presentation speculating, “the educators that were there knew what the hell we were talking about.
But the community members, the parents still needed some elaboration.” He blamed himself for failing to provide this
elaboration. Curtis and Gabriel both recounted conversations with their parents about the soil project where they
felt like their parents did not truly understand what they were saying. Curtis and Gabriel's reﬂections provide counter-
evidence that troubles the notion of transformative intellectuals. Educational institutions often create tensions or divi-
sions between students from marginalized communities and their parents or neighbors. Ultimately, these young men's
reﬂections underscore the importance of science education that values epistemic heterogeneity and cultural compe-
tence and that the work involved in this sort of undertaking is complicated and difﬁcult.
5
DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS
This study uses empirical evidence to extend previous applications of critical and culturally relevant pedagogies in sci-
ence education with three important ﬁndings: (1) The environmental racism of coal power plant pollution was not just a
local SSI, but was also a generative theme in the school community contextualized by larger forms of oppression, mak-
ing it an SJSI. (2) The curriculum contextualized by this theme supported academic achievement. (3) The curriculum
provided opportunities for students to move beyond academic achievement to position themselves as transformative
intellectuals. As transformative intellectuals, students demonstrated complex thinking about science and social justice,
cultivated their commitment to their communities and cultures, and developed credibility within their community as
local youth who were knowledgeable in science. Still, the curriculum missed opportunities to engage some of the ideals
of YPAR and epistemic heterogeneity.
In this section, I build on the ﬁndings to elaborate the theory of justice-centered science education as a catalyst for
social change. Through the exemplar of the soil project, which focused on environmental racism of coal power plant pol-
lution, the ﬁndings of this study add empirical evidence to Dos Santos’ (2009) assertion that SSI may serve as Freirean
generative themes. The ﬁndings emphasize that SSI as generative themes are both locally relevant and capture the
hearts and minds of students. Justice-centered science pedagogy applies the term SJSI to distinguish these issues from
SSI that do not meet these criteria. It was also important that the soil project was explicitly political in the way that it
connected coal power plant pollution with the larger phenomenon of environmental racism. Students were supported
to develop critical consciousness about environmental racism as they examined the distribution of heavy metal pollu-
tion across a city divided by hypersegregation and economic inequality. Combined with academic achievement, critical
consciousness allowed students to think in complex ways about scientiﬁc epistemologies, social justice, and community
self-determination. Still, there is evidence that explicit support for epistemic heterogeneity and increased opportuni-
ties for YPAR could have strengthened this aspect of the soil project.
The students who presented at family science night were positioned as producers of scientiﬁc knowledge. Through
this experience, students’ commitments to their communities and cultures of origin were strengthened as they recog-
nized the value of their cultural competence. Meanwhile they also reﬂected upon their agency to impact issues in their
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1055
FIGURE 2
Justice-centered science pedagogy, as a catalyst for social transformation, positions students as transfor-
mative intellectuals who exhibit complexity, commitment, and credibility
community and in the broader world. While presenting alongside EPA ofﬁcials and PhD scientists, students reﬁned
their ability to communicate with their community in ways that these experts could not. They bridged content knowl-
edge with cultural competence to translate scientiﬁc jargon and methodology into a bilingual summary of their study
that was meaningful to their audience. Through this presentation, both students and audience members recognized
the potential for youth to act as transformative intellectuals who draw credibility from their scientiﬁc knowledge and
their position as culturally competent members of a marginalized community.
5.1
The catalyst metaphor revisited
Figure 2 uses the imagery of a catalytic cycle from chemistry to further extend the catalyst for change metaphor intro-
duced in this study. It illustrates the relationships described above between key components of justice-centered sci-
ence pedagogy as a theory of critical pedagogy (in boldface), Ladson-Billings’ (1995) criteria for culturally relevant ped-
agogy (in rectangular boxes), and outcomes associated with students acting as transformative intellectuals (in circles).
In this diagram and analogy, justice-centered science pedagogy plays the role of the catalyst, creating alternate path-
ways for social change. Its key components represent what chemists call starting materials or reactants. The criteria for
culturally relevant pedagogy serve as reaction intermediates, or steps along the way as students self-actualize as trans-
formative intellectuals. Unlike reaction intermediates in a chemical reaction, these qualities are not destroyed in route
to the ﬁnal outcomes. The outcomes in this metaphorical reaction are the key characteristics of transformative intellec-
tuals identiﬁed in the ﬁndings of this study. Transformative intellectuals exhibit complex thinking about SJSI, cultivate
commitment to their cultures and communities, and earn credibility as members of a marginalized community who are
developing scientiﬁc expertise while they also develop an appreciation for its limits as one way of knowing.
Figure 2 elaborates justice-centered science pedagogy by clarifying and extending the interconnectedness of crit-
ical and culturally relevant pedagogies in a science context. In the case study class, curriculum informed by the prin-
ciples of critical pedagogy met the criteria for culturally relevant pedagogy. Rather than thinking of these criteria as
separate aims, science education as a catalyst for social change theorizes the criteria for culturally relevant pedagogy
as mutually supportive goals crucial to developing transformative intellectuals. Learning canonical science concepts
in the context of SJSI leads students to develop critical consciousness while equitable academic expectations sup-
port their academic achievement. These two criteria for culturally relevant pedagogy develop as interrelated parts
of the same process. Through this process, students increase the complexity of the ways they think about scientiﬁc
issues and issues of social justice. While their politics become increasingly explicit and sophisticated, they remain
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1056
MORALES-DOYLE
independent. The complexity supported by a justice-centered approach prevents students from adopting the political
views of others and instead encourages them to develop their own.
A justice-centered approach treats marginalized youth as producers of knowledge and culture and provides oppor-
tunities, like family science night, for students carrying out this role. In this study, the opportunity to engage with a SJSI
and present the results of the soil project supported students to deepen their commitments to engaging with both their
communities and SJSI. This reinforced students’ commitment to maintaining their cultural competence as a means to
communicate effectively with their neighbors and parents. Students earned credibility from their combination of cul-
tural competence, academic achievement (scientiﬁc knowledge), and their status as community members.
It is through these sorts of educational outcomes that justice-centered science pedagogy theorizes science educa-
tion as creating alternate pathways for social transformation. Thinking in complex ways about science and social jus-
tice allows students to address problems in ways that are informed by both scientiﬁc evidence and community values.
Cultivating a deep commitment to their communities is important for youth to sustain the hard work associated with
organizing for social change. The credibility that students garner as scientiﬁcally capable and grounded in their com-
munities positions them as potential leaders in addressing SJSI. Community member Ms. Juarez captured this potential
eloquently as she deﬁned social justice during our interview:
The ﬁrst thing that comes to me is ﬁghting for things when we see injustices, right? But it's also about creating
solutions and having autonomy, having a voice. Social justice is not just about ﬁghting…To have a community
that is ﬂourishing, to have a community that doesn't oppress others…It's not just about a march and a protest.
It's also about how do we create and ﬁnd our own solutions? (Ms. Juarez, Interview, 18 months after class)
Ms. Juarez highlights that transformative intellectuals not only ﬁght back against injustices, but also construct more
just and sustainable communities. In the catalyst for change metaphor, increased community self-determination, cross-
community collaboration, and solidarity are theorized as the alternate pathways for social change that allow for more
selective outcomes. This implies creating opportunities for students to work together to address SJSI that impact peo-
ple differently across the lines of race, class, and gender. Some of these issues such as global warming, food and water
shortages, or disease epidemics may ultimately threaten the well-being and survival, not just of marginalized communi-
ties, but of humankind. In this way, justice-centered science pedagogy repositions youth, who are often viewed through
deﬁcit lenses, as transformative intellectuals capable of leading social transformation.
In chemistry, a catalyst is distinguished from reactants because it ultimately remains unchanged by the process it
facilitates. Herein lies one important limit of the metaphor of science education as a catalyst for social transforma-
tion. In Figure 2, rather than being distinct, the reactants represent some key components of justice-centered science
pedagogy. Unlike a chemical catalyst, “education is…constantly remade in the praxis” (Freire, 1970/2001, p. 84). The
tenets of critical pedagogy require its practices to be reinvented in local contexts (Freire, 1978). So, while a catalyst is
unchanged by the process it facilitates, our approaches to education must change and evolve across time and space.
The extension of this work requires reinvention in other contexts, so I conclude with implications for science teachers,
teacher educators, and educational researchers committed to this reinvention.
5.2
Implications for educational researchers
The goal of this study was to examine possibilities for secondary school science curricula capable of responding to
inequity in science education as one piece of larger systematic oppression by simultaneously engaging ambitious learn-
ing expectations and issues prioritized by the local community. The results imply at least two related lines of research
to further our understandings in this realm. To truly understand science education as a response to larger issues of
oppression, we need more case studies in a wide variety of contexts. These various case studies may take the form of
teacher research or could involve partnerships between community members, educational researchers, and science
teachers. Cochran-Smith and Lytle (2009) lament that the teacher research movement has not had much success in
aggregating ﬁndings across studies. To that point, cross-case analyses (Yin, 2009) of science teachers enacting justice-
centered science pedagogy in different contexts would contribute a great deal to our understanding of how to address
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MORALES-DOYLE
1057
the seemingly intractable problem of inequity in science education. A second related line of research would examine
the preparation of justice-centered science teachers and the development of in-service teachers as they gain experi-
ence with justice-centered approaches. In both of these research trajectories, increased attention to supporting epis-
temic heterogeneity and to the principles of YPAR will strengthen the praxis of justice-centered science pedagogy.
5.3
Implications for teachers and teacher educators
Justice-centered science pedagogy calls on teachers to engage deeply and demonstrate solidarity with the communi-
ties where we teach. The ﬁrst challenge of a problem-posing approach in school science is selecting SJSI. While this
study does not provide a systematic approach to this selection process, it demonstrated that identifying SJSI requires
substantial community engagement, content learning, and political clarity on the part of the teacher. The soil project
emerged from my long-term relationships with a grassroots community organization. COVER organizers reached out
to include our class in Dr. Reyes's larger study because I attended and volunteered at their events, served on their
board, and regularly invited organizers into my classroom over a 7-year period. Once this opportunity emerged, the soil
project forced me to revisit my own understandings of science content. Prior to the project, I was unfamiliar with the
ICP-AES instrument that was used to analyze the soil. Writing the problems included in Table 3 required me to engage
in substantial content learning about the chemistry of heavy metal compounds. Taking a justice-centered approach
requires teachers to relearn and “re-cognize” (Freire, 2010, p. 11) the science content in which we have studied to be
experts. In this case, it required deepening my own understandings about the solubility and impacts of heavy metal con-
tamination. The need for us to relearn our science disciplines is intensiﬁed by the fact that most science teachers have
learned science in reductionist isolation rather than in ways that are contextualized by SJSI. Building networks of com-
munity organizations, scientists, and science educators may provide increased access for teachers to the community
knowledge and scientiﬁc expertise necessary to develop curriculum from SJSI.
Identifying issues that reside at the intersection of community concerns and canonical science understandings
requires teachers to understand both of these components deeply in their own right, but they also have to be able to
see how these concerns and understandings ﬁt into larger sociopolitical contexts. This implies understanding the ways
health and environmental problems are shaped by white supremacy, neoliberal capitalism, and heteropatriarchy. It also
implies valuing epistemic heterogeneity and critiquing the enterprise of science for the ways that it remains eurocen-
tric, androcentric, and elitist (Brown & Mutegi, 2010). At the same time, this critique must still recognize the agency of
ordinary people to wield the power of science (alongside other ways of knowing) to intervene in health and environ-
mental concerns they face (Corburn, 2005). A critical understanding of race and racism was central to the development
of both the soil project and other units in the case study class. Therefore, it is important to address sociopolitical con-
siderations in science teacher education and to increase the representation of teachers of color.
Finally, this study afﬁrms the importance of teacher experience. Improving science teacher retention in marginal-
ized schools will allow more teachers to get the long-term experience required to hone a justice-centered approach.
Teacher retention is difﬁcult in a political climate where resources are withheld and teachers and schools face ever-
increasing top-down accountability measures driven by the standardized testing industry. By emphasizing grassroots
community relevance, this study afﬁrms Tate's (2001) prediction that equity in science education will not be achieved
by “raising standards” or “increased accountability” from the top down. Instead, accountability should come from the
people for whom teachers really work: students, parents, and communities. To engage SJSI, justice-centered science
pedagogy acknowledges and seeks to subvert schools’ historical roles as reproducers of social inequality. This implies
reimagining schools (and science classrooms) that are constructed by communities working in genuine collaboration
with educators.
ENDNOTES
1 Pseudonyms are used for the school, communities, organizations, students, and other participants.
 1098237x, 2017, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.21305 by Duke University Libraries, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1058
MORALES-DOYLE
ORCID
Daniel Morales-Doyle
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9425-2158
