Incorporating Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Awareness and
Knowledge in a First-Semester Organic Chemistry Classroom
Rajesh Sunasee*
Cite This: J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 4335−4342
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Embracing diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) in the chemistry classroom is
crucial for creating an inclusive learning environment that will have a positive effect on student’s
learning, success, and hence, retention in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM). As such, a number of DEI approaches have recently been identified to foster
awareness and appreciation of DEI into undergraduate chemistry education. However, in
addition to creating DEI awareness, studies or educational approaches whereby undergraduate
students are being exposed to some basic DEI knowledge are limited. Hence, in this work, three
key DEI initiatives were incorporated into a first semester of Organic Chemistry at a primarily
undergraduate institution. The first initiative included a weekly 5−10 min DEI video-discussion
activity focusing on building awareness and basic knowledge such as DEI terminology, implicit
bias, microaggression, gender, and systemic racism in STEM. The profile of several Black
scientists as well as women scientists who have changed the world were also highlighted. The
second initiative involved the design of five DEI-based extra credit assignments that connected
course content (or concepts) with the historical achievements of a diverse set of chemists. Finally, DEI-based bonus questions were
incorporated in three term exams as a formal assessment of student’s DEI learning throughout the semester. Pre- and post-DEI-
related surveys were conducted, and students’ feedback about their DEI learning experiences were overall largely positive. Student
scores and answers on the DEI-based activities were analyzed, and the results indicated an increase in the awareness and basic
knowledge of DEI in STEM education.
KEYWORDS: Second-Year Undergraduate, Organic Chemistry, Testing/Assessment, Minorities in Chemistry, Inclusive Teaching,
Broadening Participation, Cultural Relevance
■ INTRODUCTION
Diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) continues to receive
increased attention in higher education institutions, as one of the
primary goals is to foster a learning environment where all
students succeed and thrive. As such, several DEI efforts have
been integrated in various aspects in the academic institutions
largely focusing on making their institutions more equitable and
inclusive for all faculty, staff, and students. Within the chemistry
education system, guidelines for advancing DEI in chemistry
programs have been incorporated in an attempt to promote a
DEI culture among chemistry programs.1 With the classroom
population becoming increasingly diverse, there has been a rise
in the need for and interest in emphasizing DEI in the chemical
education sector.2 The use of inclusive pedagogies is becoming
more common,3,4 and the infusion of DEI in teaching helps to
deepen students’ understanding, create a sense of belonging, and
thus allow a more inclusive educational classroom environment.
As we are rapidly moving in an increasingly globalized and
connected world, it is important to create DEI awareness among
students so that they are better prepared to be global citizens.
Recently, a number of DEI approaches have been identified to
foster awareness and appreciation of DEI into undergraduate
chemistry education. Some examples of these DEI strategies
include the use of storytelling as a powerful educational tool to
address equity in chemical education,5 engaging historically
Black and underrepresented students in undergraduate research
experiences,6,7 introducing diverse chemists in chemistry
courses,8 embedding DEI into chemistry skills training for
undergraduates,9 and designing activities that foster diversity,
inclusion, and implicit bias.10 A recent study discussed the
importance of a peer mentoring program, the infusion of
research into the organic chemistry lab, funded research
activities, undergraduate professional development, research
group meetings, presentations at regional/national conferences,
and publishing as coauthors on peer-review papers as crucial
strategies for promoting DEI in organic chemistry education.11
In an attempt to create an inclusive learning community, a team-
based poster conference activity was designed to allow first-year
Received:
June 4, 2023
Revised:
September 26, 2023
Accepted:
October 3, 2023
Published: October 20, 2023
Article
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
© 2023 The Author. Published by
American Chemical Society and Division
of Chemical Education, Inc.
4335
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.3c00528
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 4335−4342
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
Downloaded via 68.65.175.96 on February 18, 2024 at 00:17:00 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.
undergraduate students to discuss diversity and inclusion in
chemistry.12
Typical examples of chemistry courses that have introduced
DEI-based activities in the classroom are General Chem-
istry,8,13−17 Analytical Chemistry,18,19 and Biochemistry20 with
limited studies on DEI-related strategies for undergraduate
Organic Chemistry courses,21,22 despite the latter being a
popular course for both Chemistry majors and nonmajors.
Organic Chemistry course content includes fascinating mole-
cules that can be easily linked with interesting stories to highlight
the historical and intellectual achievements of women and
chemists of color. Herein, this work features three DEI-related
strategies that were incorporated in a first-semester Organic
Chemistry course at a primarily undergraduate institution. The
DEI-based strategies entailed an in-class weekly video-
discussion activity to build basic knowledge on DEI terminol-
ogy, implicit bias, microaggression, gender, and systemic racism
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
The design of five DEI-based extra credit assignments that
connected course content with the historical achievements of a
diverse set of chemists was implemented as well as DEI-based
bonus questions in three term exams as a formal assessment of
student’s DEI learning throughout the semester.
■ METHODS
Demographics and Participants
The State University of New York (SUNY) at Plattsburgh is a
primarily undergraduate institution located in a small city
around the beautiful New York’s Adirondacks region. Current
enrollment comprises 4323 undergraduate students and 415
graduate students with an overall of 39% male and 61% female.
32% students are identified as minoritized racial identities
(Black, Hispanic/Latino, and two or more races). Participants
for this study included students (N = 44) enrolled for the first
semester of Organic Chemistry (CHE241) for the Spring 2022
semester. Among the participants, 30% reported being first-
generation college students with 60% as White race and 40% as
non-White race or ethnicity (Black African-American, Asian,
Hispanic). While only 2% of the class were Chemistry majors,
the majority of the students were non-Chemistry majors with
62% Biomedical Science, 18% Biology, 9% Nutrition and others.
Incorporating DEI Initiatives in an Organic Chemistry First
Semester Course
The objectives of incorporating DEI initiatives in the Organic
Chemistry course were mainly to create an understanding of the
importance of DEI in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education and build an awareness of
some common DEI issues such as implicit bias, racism,
microaggressions, and gender issues in the STEM field.
Ultimately, the main goal is to equip undergraduate students
with basic DEI knowledge. For the full first semester of Organic
Chemistry, three DEI initiatives were undertaken as follows:
• A weekly 5−10 min DEI-related in-class video-discussion
activity
• Design of five DEI-based extra credit assignments that
connect course content (or concepts) with the historical
achievements of a diverse set of chemists
• Design of three DEI-based exam bonus questions as a
formal assessment of student’s DEI learning
While the class met in two 75 min sessions per week during
the semester, only one of the sessions was used to incorporate
the weekly 5−10 min DEI related video-discussion activity. This
will depend on the flow of the Organic Chemistry course
materials as well as the instructor’s choice for which lecture
session to complete the DEI activity. Table 1 illustrates a typical
course structure and timeline for the DEI materials that were
covered on a weekly basis. On the first day of class (week 1),
students were introduced to the instructor’s DEI statement as
part of the course outline (refer to Supporting Information for
the instructor’s specific DEI statement). The incorporation of a
DEI statement in course syllabi is now common in academia,
and the calls for its inclusion are increasing.23,24 A recent
publication indicated that including a DEI statement on the
course syllabus can support a strong sense of belonging for the
students and the placement of the DEI statement within the
syllabus is also crucial. In general, DEI statements that display
earlier in the syllabus are more likely to be recalled by students.25
On the first day of classes, students were engaged in an in-class
activity called “Picture a Scientist” where they were required to
write down the name of any scientist they knew or have heard
about. Then, in week 2, the results of the activity were shown to
the students with the data being analyzed and discussed. The
profile of a Black scientist (George Washington Carver) was also
highlighted, which coincided well with the celebration of Black
History month. Week 3 introduced the students to the basic
terminology of DEI supported with examples using a
combination of a YouTube video and in-class discussion.
Week 5 further enhanced on DEI terminology concepts by
focusing on the difference between equity and equality. The
other weeks (Table 1) followed a similar strategy to discuss key
DEI issues such as implicit bias (week 6), systemic racism (week
10), gender issues (week 11), microaggressions (week 13), and
the benefits of embracing DEI (week 14). In addition, the profile
Table 1. Overview of DEI Course Materials and Timeline
Week #
DEI Video-Discussion In-Class Activity
Video (Time)a
1
DEI Statement
In-Class Activity: Picture a Scientist DEI
Precourse Survey
2
Data Analysis: Picture a Scientist Highlighting a
Black Scientist
3
Definition of DEI with Examples
YouTube (3.12
min)26
4
Five Black Chemists Who Changed the World
YouTube (2.54
min)27
5
Equity vs Equality with Examples
YouTube (1.16
min)28
6
Unconscious (Implicit) Bias in Action Implicit
Bias Activity
YouTube (1.45
min)29
7
Spring Break
8
DEI Bonus Question in Exam 1
9
Three Black Scientists (Past, Present, and Future)
You Should Know
BBC (4.13
min)30
10
Racism in STEM
YouTube (5.18
min)31
11
Women in Science Who Changed the World;
Sexism/Gender Issues in STEM
YouTube (4.55
min)32
12
DEI Bonus Question in Exam 2
13
Microaggressions
YouTube (3.42
min)33
14
Benefits of Embracing DEI
15
DEI Bonus Question in Exam 3
DEI Postcourse Survey
aReference links to videos.
Journal of Chemical Education
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.3c00528
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 4335−4342
4336
of several Black scientists as well as women scientists who have
changed the world were highlighted (weeks 4, 9, and 11).
The second DEI initiative involved the design of five DEI-
based extra credit assignments that aligned course content with
the historical achievements of a diverse set of chemists. Five
chemists (African-American or people of color) were chosen,
and their backgrounds and discoveries were first briefly
highlighted, followed by the graded extra-credit assignment
questions. The questions were framed based on the organic
molecules that were part of their historical scientific achieve-
ments, and at the same time, they were related to common
organic chemistry concepts taught in the lectures such as
hybridization, functional groups, resonance, acidity, stereo-
chemistry, and IR spectroscopy (Table 2). A typical example of a
DEI-based extra-credit assignment is shown in Figure 1 (refer to
the Supporting Information for the remaining four DEI-based
extra credit assignments). The first part of the assignment
required the students to read a brief biography of the chemist
and then answer the questions that followed.
The third initiative entailed the design of three DEI-based
exam bonus questions with the goal to further motivate students
to keep abreast of the DEI materials discussed in class but also as
a formative assessment of students’ DEI learning (Table 3 and
Supporting Information). Exam 1 DEI-based bonus questions
included basic DEI terminology questions and the contributions
of five Black scientists who changed the world (Percy Julian,
Mae Jemison, Patricia Bath, Betty Harris, George Washington
Carver). Exam 2 DEI-based bonus questions focused on DEI
issues such as racism in STEM and the achievements of five
women scientists (Lise Meitner, Jocelyn Bell Burnell, Emmy
Noether, Caroline Herschel, Rosalind Franklin). Finally, Exam 3
DEI-based bonus questions were linked with the five DEI-based
graded assignments to assess the overall knowledge of the
scientific contributions of women and Black African-American/
people of color scientists. Students were asked to name and
briefly discuss the scientific contributions of two women
chemists/scientists (other than Marie Curie and Rosalind
Franklin) and two Black African-American chemists/scientists.
■ RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The data obtained from the first day in-class activity about
“picture a scientist” was analyzed and the results indicated that
75% of the class (N = 44) responded with the name of men
scientists with Albert Einstein and Neils Bohr being the two
Table 2. Design of the Five DEI-Based Extra Credit Assignmentsa
aEC#1: Percy L. Julian; EC#2: Asima Chatterjee; EC#3: St Elmo Brady; EC#4: Marie M. Daly; EC#5: Alma H. Hayden.
Journal of Chemical Education
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.3c00528
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 4335−4342
4337
most common ones (Figure 2). This was not too surprising
given that students are often exposed to the work of Albert
Einstein in high school and Neils Bohr in their general chemistry
classes. Interestingly, only one student responded with the name
of a Black African-American scientist, namely, George
Washington Carver. 16% of the responses were women
scientists with only the names of Marie Curie and Rosalind
Franklin, while 9% of the responses were unaware of the name of
any scientist. This quick in-class activity on the first day of class
further provided the instructor with the class dynamics regarding
student’s lack of awareness and knowledge about a diverse set of
scientists. As such, DEI-based activities that highlighted the
contributions of Black African-American/people of color and
women scientists were reinforced throughout the semester
(Table 1).
Pre- and postcourse DEI-based surveys (IRB #1698) were
administered in order to gain insight into students’ general
awareness and knowledge of DEI in general as well as DEI-based
issues in the STEM field (Supporting Information). In the
precourse survey, students were initially asked if they had
previously heard about DEI (Yes/No question style), and if the
answer was yes, they were further prompted to answer how or
where they have heard about it. Questions regarding their
awareness of DEI issues in STEM education and if they would
like to learn about those DEI issues were also asked, and the
results are shown in Table 4 below. 55% (N = 44) responded
that they have not heard of DEI, and the remaining who
responded positively indicated that they heard about DEI
through other courses, on-campus flyers, school emails, sorority
clubs, and tv shows or from a friend. About 83% of the class
displayed an interest in learning about DEI issues in STEM
education.
In a postcourse survey question, students were asked to
compare their general awareness of DEI issues in the STEM field
prior and after the course, and the results are shown in Figure 3.
Prior to the course, about 73% of students’ ratings were in the
range of fair to very poor, which aligned well with a similar
precourse survey question where 76% responded “No” for their
awareness of DEI issues in STEM (Table 4). However, after
completion of the course with the incorporation of the three DEI
initiatives, students felt more confident about their awareness of
DEI issues in STEM with more than 90% of students’ ratings
ranging from good to excellent (Figure 3, right).
Students’ performances in the five DEI-based extra-credit
assignments that linked course content were assessed as shown
Figure 1. A typical example of a DEI-based graded assignment depicting a brief biography of the scientist followed by questions connecting course
content such as hybridization and functional groups for the organic molecule cortisone.
Table 3. Selected Examples of DEI-Based Bonus Questions in
Term Exams
Exam #
DEI-Based Bonus Question
1
What do you understand by the terms (i) diversity; (ii) inclusion?
Explain briefly the key difference between equity and equality.
2
Racism in STEM education or the workplace has been a major
problem for many years. Can you briefly explain how racism is
affecting STEM education? What is the root problem and how can
one alleviate the issue?
3
Can you name two women chemists (or scientists) other than Marie
Curie and Rosalind Franklin? Briefly describe their scientific
contributions.
Can you name two African-American chemists (or scientists) other
than the ones you already mentioned in part 1 above? Briefly
describe their scientific contributions.
Journal of Chemical Education
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.3c00528
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 4335−4342
4338
in Figure 4a. Despite being an extra-credit assignment, the
percentage of students who attempted all five extra-credit
assignments was high (about 90% on average). Students who
scored in the range 0−20% were mainly those who did not
attempt the extra-credit assignment. Students performed well in
the extra-credit assignments #1 and #4, which dealt with basic
concepts such as hybridization, functional groups, and stereo-
chemistry. Some students struggled with difficult concepts such
as resonance effect (EC#2) and acidity of organic molecule
(EC#3), as displayed by the varying % grade distribution (Figure
4a). While the overarching goal of this activity was to connect
the historical achievements of a diverse set of chemists, students
were required to first read the brief biography of the chemists
prior to attempting the follow-up questions. One way to assess if
students were actually retaining the DEI knowledge about those
chemists was to link it with Exam 3 DEI-based bonus questions,
which evaluated students’ knowledge about the scientific
contributions of women and Black African-American/people
of color scientists. In general, the DEI-based exam bonus
questions were used as a formative assessment of student’s
overall DEI learning throughout the semester. Student’s
performance in the three DEI-based exam bonus questions are
depicted in Figure 4b. The majority of students (91% for N = 43
with a performance rating of 90−100% and 70−89%) had a
good understanding about DEI terminology (diversity,
inclusion, equity v/s equality) and the contribution of five
black scientists (Bonus Exam #1, Figure 4b). In the DEI Bonus
Exam #2, students scored fairly well on the question related to
the root cause of racism in STEM education and workplace as
well as the contribution of five women scientists. Finally, for DEI
Bonus Exam #3, 79% of students were able to correctly cite the
names and briefly discuss the scientific contributions of two
women chemists/scientists (other than Marie Curie and
Rosalind Franklin) and two Black African-American chemists/
scientists (based on 35% for a score of 90−100% and 44% for a
score of 70−89%).
In addition to the general assessment of students’ DEI
learning performances, the postcourse DEI survey included four
Likert-scale prompts in order to assess the participants’ overall
perceptions of the incorporation of the three DEI initiatives in
the course (Figure 5). All participants agreed that the DEI videos
were a good educational tool to learn the basics of DEI, and 97%
responded they would like to learn more about DEI issues in the
STEM education.
97.7% agreed (including 69.8% strongly agreed) that they are
now aware of a diverse group of scientists and their contributions
in the STEM field. When responding to the statement “Addition
of DEI component has a positive effect on my overall learning”,
91.7% agreed (including 65.1% strongly agreed) and 9.3% had
Figure 2. Students’ responses (N = 44) to the “picture a scientist” activity and data analysis of the responses toward the % of men and women scientists.
Responses with no entries (9%) indicated students who did not know the name of a scientist.
Table 4. Precourse DEI Survey Questions and Students’
Responsesa
Precourse DEI-Based Survey
Question
% of Students’
Response (Yes)
% of Students’
Response (No)
Have you heard about DEI before?
45.0
55.0
Are you aware of any DEI issues in
STEM?
23.8
76.2
Would you like to learn about DEI
issues in STEM education?
83.3
16.7
aN = 44.
Figure 3. Students’ responses (ratings from very poor to excellent) to the awareness of DEI issues in the STEM field before (left figure; N = 44) and
after (right figure; N = 43) the incorporation of the three DEI initiatives in the course content.
Journal of Chemical Education
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.3c00528
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 4335−4342
4339
neutral responses. The postcourse DEI survey also included one
open-ended question, namely, “What did you value most about
this DEI component?”, and some of the selected student’s
responses are depicted in Table 5. Overall, students highly
valued the addition of a DEI component to the Organic
Chemistry course.
■ CONCLUSIONS
This study entailed the design, implementation, and results of
incorporating three DEI-based initiatives in a first-semester
Organic Chemistry course at a primarily undergraduate
institution. DEI-related activities that linked course content
were introduced in addition to building awareness and basic DEI
knowledge. Students’ surveys indicated that the majority of
students agreed that the addition of the DEI-component had a
positive effect on their overall learning and they would like to
learn more about DEI issues in STEM education. Infusing DEI
in the course content is crucial for promoting a respectful,
inclusive classroom environment, and hopefully, it will better
prepare students in a diverse world. While these three DEI-based
initiatives were implemented in an Organic Chemistry lecture
course, similar DEI strategies can be integrated in other
chemistry courses. Future studies will need to focus on the
impact of DEI initiatives or strategies in course curriculum
toward students’ overall course performance and, also, how the
DEI awareness helps students overcome challenges such as
implicit bias, microaggression, gender, and systemic racism in
STEM.
Figure 4. Students’ performance in the (a) five DEI-based extra credit assignments (EC #1−5) and (b) DEI bonus exam questions 1−3 with scores
ranging in each assignment/bonus questions from 90−100% to 0−29% (N = 43).
Figure 5. Students’ responses to Likert-scale questions on the postcourse survey to gain feedback on the overall goal of adding DEI initiatives in the
course (N = 43).
Table 5. Selected Students’ Responses to the Postcourse DEI
Survey Open-Ended Question
Students’ Unedited Comments to Survey Open-Ended Question: “What Did
You Value Most about This DEI Component?”
“The inclusion of multiple perspectives of inequality in the STEM field”
“I enjoyed the short but informative videos at the middle or end of lectures. It
was a nice brain break and it was something I looked forward to”
“Got to know about how unconscious bias can affect STEM, learned a lot about
women scientists and struggles they faced”
“Being able to be aware that as a person of color I may have to deal with the
problems myself”
“I value that I will feel more impacted in this field by my peers as a black woman
now that they are aware of the disparities in the STEM field”
“Getting to learn about the history of DEI in STEM so I can be educated enough
to be [an] advocate and make a difference in the field”
Journal of Chemical Education
pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.3c00528
J. Chem. Educ. 2023, 100, 4335−4342
4340
■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available at https://pubs.ac-
s.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jchemed.3c00528.
Pre- and postcourse surveys; instructor’s DEI statement in
course outline; DEI-based extra credit assignments #1 to
#5; DEI-based exam bonus questions #1 to #3 (PDF;
DOCX)
■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Rajesh Sunasee − Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
State University of New York at Plattsburgh, Plattsburgh, New
York 12901, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-2383-
7228; Email: rajesh.sunasee@plattsburgh.edu
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.3c00528
Notes
The author declares no competing financial interest.
■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank Rochelle LaForest for the
artwork of the pictures of the five scientists as part of the DEI-
based extra credit assignments. Special thanks to SUNY
Plattsburgh Office of Diversity, Equity and Inclusion and Centre
for Teaching Excellence for their ongoing efforts in promoting a
DEI culture in both teaching and the workplace environment.
■ 